# Opening Credits

This is Audible.


# Chapter 1

Forward. True story. Not long after the financial crisis of 2008-2009,
I was dragged to a posh Long Island country club for some terribly boring social event.
Those Tony golf places are not my idea of fun. On my way out the door I was introduced
to someone—let's call him Trader Guy—who is described to me, Sato Vochi, as the wealthiest
person in the club. The thinking apparently was, hey, two finance guys, they should meet.
We exchanged small talk. Trader Guy's diffidence makes it clear he has no interest in chatting.
We are both heading out to the valet—these places won't let you park your own car—and
a rather memorable few moments ensued. Trader Guy knows who I am. My book on the
financial crisis had come out the prior year. I had already been a regular in the financial
media for a while. He knows my name, and, truth be told, he could not possibly have cared less.
If only to be polite to the host who introduced us, I asked what sort of trading he does.
Trader Guy actually sighs deeply, then says to me,
I trade everything. I am a trend follower. You wouldn't understand.
Oh, really? What a coincidence, I say.
A friend of mine wrote a book on trend following. By now I have exhausted what
little patience Trader Guy had with me to begin with. I actually heard his eyes roll.
Listen, dude, it's really cute you have a friend who wrote a book on this,
but there is only one book on the topic. Every other one is crap. Your pal wasted
trees riding his. The definitive book on this subject, the only one that matters,
is called trend following. Everything else is a waste of your time.
I tried. I really tried so hard not to smirk. As best as I could with a straight face,
I casually say, yeah, that's the one. That's the book Mike—my friend Mike Covel wrote—trend
following. Talk about an attitude adjustment. Trader Guy has a genuine come-to-Jesus moment,
turning into a smitten schoolgirl. Oh, my God! Oh, my God! Oh, my God! Oh, my God! You know Mike
Covel? I love that book. I love trend following. I was a failing trader,
about to get blown out of the business. I read that book, and it turned my whole life around.
I owe that guy my entire career. Ah, the tables have turned. Now it is my turn to have a little fun.
I keep telling Mike he needs to punch it up, make it more colorful, add a section on forecasting
economic data, evaluating corporate management, and analyzing geopolitics. Make it fresh and
interesting. Long pause as Trader Guy's jaw drops. It takes him a few seconds before he realizes that,
A, I am totally kidding, B, I understand how irrelevant those things are to trend followers,
and, C, I am busting his chops for being such a hard-ass before. Trader Guy laughs,
as I am now deemed worthy. We are suddenly best buds. We chat about what we were short during
the crisis—A.I.G., Lehman, Bayer. The equity rally off of the lows, strong, and the gold run,
at risk of breaking. Dollar trending. His car pulls up. We keep talking. My car comes around,
and we are still talking. Mr. Diffident has morphed into Mr. Conversationalist.
All of which goes a long way towards explaining why the book you're listening to, now in its fifth
edition, has become one of the most popular trading books ever written. What are the characteristics
that make trend following so unique? I have my own biases. I see the inherent and natural flaws
of human psychology as an investor's biggest flaws. Like our inability to understand risk and data
and statistics, our obsession to be right, and the ways our wetware constantly fool us into believing
things that objectively are not true. Hence, my top ten reasons I like trend following reflect all of
that. 1. It is an objective, price-based approach. 2. News headlines, pundits, analysts, and opinions
are not meaningful. 3. It has risk management built into it. 4. Specific views on the fundamentals
are not relevant. 5. It is methodical and systematic. 6. The exact same strategies apply
across all asset classes. 7. It does not require any predictions.
8. Timeframes are long-term in nature. 9. Economic data, employment, GDP,
fed, etc., are irrelevant. 10. It demands a very exacting personal discipline.
Readers may find that other aspects of trend following that resonate more for them.
It depends on your own personality. But what does not vary for any trend follower
is understanding the specific underlying philosophy and having the discipline to follow
that approach with unwavering religious dedication. I have a few complaints as well.
It gives you nothing to talk about at cocktail parties or barbecues. It is less intellectually
stimulating than, say, debating whether and when the FOMC should or should not, or will or will
not, raise or lower rates next meeting. It can be boring. And there are long stretches of time
where the next trend is neutral, and you are doing nothing. Anyone can learn the methods
Covelle discusses here. Putting them into action requires commitment to the craft
and a military discipline. The Achilles heel of so many traitors is a lack of precisely
those qualities. As you will learn, trend followers must be willing to tough out some
difficult sledding. It is an old joke, but it's true. If it was easy, everyone would be rich.
But it is not easy. Anyone who has lived with a major drawdown understands how your own body
responds. Physical and emotional tolls are not insignificant. You lose sleep, you have a low
grade headache for days or weeks at a time, and some people respond with physical nausea.
The biggest issue comes in the hit to self-confidence.
Writing out the loss of capital leads traitors to question themselves and to doubt their methodology.
They wonder if maybe it really is different this time. Market structures have changed,
the Fed is doing something unprecedented, high-frequency trading is new, or perhaps it
is ETFs they think something is different this time around. Perhaps if I just tweak the
approach a little here this once are famous last words. To those who master the techniques
described herein, there are profits to be had. But it is not for everyone, and if you are unable
or unwilling to write out the losses except drawdowns and capital, be bored through periods
of tedium and inactivity to have the discipline to follow your strategy. To you, I say, move along,
trend following is not for everyone. For those who want to learn the craft of trading, have
the personality and discipline, and are willing to do the heavy lifting, read on. You won't regret it.
Barry L. Ritholz. Chairman, Chief Investment Officer, Ritholz Wealth Management.
Columnist for Bloomberg View and Washington Post.
Host of Masters in Business radio podcast for Bloomberg.


# Chapter 2

Preface. Men wanted for hazardous journey, small wages,
bitter cold, long months of complete darkness, constant danger, safe return doubtful, honor
and recognition in case of success. Want to take the financial journey to a new
investing philosophy that might very well affect the rest of your money-making life?
I can't guarantee the yellow brick road, but I can promise the red pill will leave
you wide awake. In late 2016, the Wall Street Journal reported
that Steve Edmondson, the investment chief for the Nevada Public Employees Retirement
System, has no co-workers, rarely takes meetings, and eats leftovers at his desk.
His daily trading strategy? Do as little as possible, usually nothing.
The Nevada system's $35 billion in stocks and bonds are all in low-cost funds that mimic indexes.
He may make one change to the portfolio a year.
Not exactly a life-changing revelation, I know, but that do-nothing, sit-on-your-hands
investing premise doesn't stop with one-man shows.
Dimensional Fund Advisors, LP, DFA, the sixth-largest mutual fund manager,
is drawing in nearly $2 billion in net assets per month at a time when investors
are fleeing other firms. DFA is built on the bedrock belief that active management
practiced by traditional stock pickers is futile, if not an absurdity.
DFA's founders are pioneers of index funds. Now we are getting somewhere,
because just about everyone has money tied up in an index fund, which in 2017
is not exactly pioneering. But the much larger issue at hand, unknown to most,
is that there is an academic theory that allows anyone to confidently index.
The efficient market theory, EMT, states asset prices fully reflect all available information.
This means it is impossible for average investors, or superstars for that matter,
to beat the market consistently on a risk-adjusted basis,
since market prices should only react to new information or changes in discount rates.
EMT, set in motion with Louis Bachelier's Ph.D. thesis published in 1900
and developed by University of Chicago professor Eugene Fama,
argues stocks always trade at fair value, making it impossible for investors
to either purchase undervalued stocks or sell stocks for inflated prices.
Let me drop the nuclear warhead on that perspective.
There is a mind-numbingly large hole in this cool-sounding theory.
EMT, by definition, leaves the epic October 2008 stock market meltdown
out of the academic equation. And for those who know about the sausage-making
of writing peer-review papers or engineering a Ph.D.,
much of modern finance's foundation was bricked together with EMT mortar.
Fama was ultimately awarded the 2013 Nobel Prize in Economic Sciences
because his findings changed market practice,
that is, the worldwide acceptance of index funds.
Those findings are the generally accepted status quo.
Not everyone, however, is a true believer guzzling the Kool-Aid.
One of the first and loudest critics of EMT was famed mathematician Benoit Mandelbrot.
He saw EMT proponents sweep big events like 2008 under the carpet,
like kids housecleaning for the first time, calling them acts of God.
French physicist Jean-Philippe Bouchot sees EMT marketing in play.
The efficient market hypothesis is not only intellectually enticing,
but also very reassuring for individual investors who can buy stock shares
without risking being outsmarted by more savvy investors.
Bouchot continues.
Classical economics is built on very strong assumptions that quickly become axioms,
the rationality of economic agents, the invisible hand and market efficiency, etc.
An economist once told me, to my bewilderment,
these concepts are so strong that they supersede any empirical observation.
As Robert Nelson argued in his book, Economics as Religion,
the marketplace has been deified.
In reality, markets are not efficient,
humans tend to be over-focused in the short term and blind in the long term,
and errors get amplified through social pressure and hurting,
ultimately leading to collective irrationality, panic, and crashes.
Free markets are wild markets.
David Harding, a man you might not know yet,
ratchets up the polemic by describing EMT in apocalyptic terms.
Imagine if the economy as we know it was built on a myth.
Imagine if that myth was the foundation stone on which the mainstream financial systems
that control the global economy have been erected,
the great bazaars of stock markets, bond markets,
fiendishly complex financial instruments, credit default swaps,
futures and options on which the fortunes of billions rest.
Imagine if the myth was the key cause of the global crash in 2008,
and if its perpetuation today threatened another catastrophic crash in the future.
We don't have to imagine.
The myth is efficient market theory, EMT.
Harding does not have a Nobel Prize, but he does have a net worth of $1.4 billion.
He is a flat-out financial heretic and would not be offended
if you called him a punk rocker for his anti-establishment attitude.
In prior centuries, he absolutely would have been burned at the stake
for his wholesale dressing down of the financial high priests.
He knows to question EMT is seen as madness by academics,
banks, pension funds, and endowments.
Interestingly, with a bipolar flare,
the Nobel Committee split the 2013 Nobel Prize among economists
with radically different theories.
Robert Schiller, a man focused more on behavior
and who shares the Nobel Prize with Fama, sees the contradictions.
I think that maybe he has a cognitive dissonance.
His research shows that markets are not efficient.
So what do you do if you are living in the University of Chicago?
It's like being a Catholic priest and then discovering that God doesn't exist
or something you can't deal with, so you've got to somehow rationalize it.
Harding goes further, explaining EMT madness in an everyman way.
This theory of rational markets treats economics like a physical science,
like Newtonian physics, when in fact it is a human or social science.
Human beings are prone to unpredictable behavior,
to overreaction or slumbering inaction, to mania and panic.
The markets that reflect this behavior do not assume some superhuman wisdom.
They can and sometimes do reflect that volatility.
Further translation?
Human nature isn't rational.
It blows bubbles and then pops bubbles.
You can see this going back hundreds of years.
Dutch Tulip Mania, 1634-1637
The South Sea Bubble, 1716-1720
The Mississippi Bubble, 1716-1720
The British Railway Mania Bubble, 1840s
The Panic of 1857
The Florida Real Estate Bubble of the 1920s
The Stock Market Crash of 1929
The 1973-1974 Stock Market Crash
Black Monday, the Stock Market Crash of 1987
Japan's Bubble Economy and Crash, 1989 to current
Dotcom Bubble, 1999 to 2002
United States Bear Market, 2007 to 2009
Flash Crash, 2010
Chinese Stock Market Crash, 2015 to 2016
Brexit, 2016
And on and on.
But it's beyond not rational.
Those events, the human actions driving those booms and busts,
are best described by academia's prospect theory,
cognitive dissonance, the bandwagon effect,
loss aversion, and assorted heuristics in judgment and decision-making,
to name a few of the hundreds of biases inherent in people's lizard brains.
No doubt, the efficient versus not efficient debate
will not be resolved in these pages.
Perhaps it will never be satisfactorily resolved in an academic
mine is bigger than yours sense, which would not be surprising
given that human beings and their egos, greed, fear, and money
are knotted up so tight as to restrict brain blood flow.
And please, don't expect this work to be filled
with the latest and greatest macroeconomic bubblegum predictions.
You already know that is bullshit completely unrelated to making money,
even if you have not yet admitted that fact to yourself.
In the face of such chaos, complexity, and human frailty,
my curiosity is quite simple.
Answer a question.
Why does David Harding think he is right, and, more importantly,
how in the hell did he get all that money trading the likes of
Apple, Tesla, gold, U.S. dollars, crude oil, Nasdaq, natural gas,
lean hogs, palm oil, wheat, and coffee without investing in an index
or having a fundamental expertise in any of those markets
or the ability to predict directions?
That is a worthy question, and the answer is a follow the big money adventure.
Trend following.
The 233,092 words in this book are the result of my near 20-year hazardous journey
for the truth about this trading called trend following.
To this day, it still fills a void in a marketplace inundated with books
about value investing, index investing, and fundamental analysis,
but lacking few resources to explain how David Harding
made his billion-dollar fortune with trend following.
Out of the gate, let me break down the term trend following into its components.
The first part is trend.
Every trader needs a trend to make money.
If you think about it, no matter what the technique,
if there is not a trend after you buy,
then you will not be able to sell at higher prices.
Following is the next part of the term.
We use this word because trend followers always wait for the trend to shift first,
then follow it.
Every good trend following method should automatically limit the loss
in any position, long or short, without limiting the gain.
Whenever a trend, once established, reverses quickly,
there is always a point not far above or below the extreme reached prior to the reversal
at which evidence of a trend in the opposite direction is given.
At that point, any position held in the direction of the original trend
should be reversed, or at least closed out, at a limited loss.
Profits are not limited because whenever a trend, once established,
continues in a sustained fashion without giving any evidence of trend reversal,
the trend following principle requires a market position be maintained
as long as the trend continues.
A big reason this conceptually works is seen in the wonky sounding
Bayesian statistics.
Named for Thomas Bayes, 1701 to 1761,
the belief is the true state of the world is best expressed in probabilities
that continually update as new unbiased information appears,
like a price trend that keeps updating and extending.
New data stays connected to prior data. Think of it chain gang together.
Random dice rolls, this is not.
Trend following thus aims to capture the majority of a connected market trend
up or down for outsized profit.
It is designed for potential gains in all major asset classes,
stocks, bonds, metals, currencies, and hundreds of other commodities.
However straightforward the basics of trend following,
it is a style of trading widely misunderstood
by both average and pro investors, if it is known at all.
Academic literature and real world investors, for example,
have put forth a host of strategies that on the surface appear unique,
but at a high level they are all related to trend following.
That classic trend wisdom has long failed to be understood in academic circles,
that is until very recently.
Notable voices in the academic community have come around to agree
momentum exists, the source of trend following profit,
but to confuse matters they describe two forms of momentum,
time series momentum, that is trend following,
and cross-sectional momentum, that is relative strength.
I don't see a connection between the two,
and I can guess carving out business and academic niches
for assorted reasons is in play,
but I do know which strategy has produced decades
of real performance proof, and its trend following.
The desire to enlighten this state of confusion is what launched
my original research and ignited my passion,
going all the way back to 1994.
My plan was to be as objective as possible,
pulling research data from wide sources.
Month by month trend following performance histories,
hundreds of interviews conducted with subjects
from top traders to Nobel Prize winners,
published interviews from dozens of trend followers over the last 50 years,
details not found on Google,
charts of winning markets traded by trend followers,
charts of historical markets seen across financial disasters.
If I could have utilized only data, numbers, charts, and graphs,
showing extreme trend following performance data,
that would have been perfect.
That is, after all, the raw, unassailable data.
Yet without a narrative explanation,
few readers would appreciate the ramifications of data mining.
Robert Schiller has said that there is a narrative basis
for much of the human thought process
that the human mind can store facts around narratives,
stories with a beginning and an end that have an emotional resonance.
You can still memorize numbers, but you need stories.
For example, the financial markets generate tons of numbers,
dividends, prices, etc., but they don't mean anything to us.
We either need a story or a theory, but stories come first.
Foundationally, my approach to researching and writing trend following
became similar to the one described in the book Good to Great,
in which researchers generated questions,
accumulated data in an open-ended search for answers,
and then debated it all, looking for stories,
then for explanations that could lead to theories.
However, unlike Good to Great,
which was all about well-known public companies,
to this day the strategy of trend following
is still built around an underground network
of relatively unknown traders who,
except for the occasional misguided article,
the mainstream press virtually ignores.
And that has not changed in my twenty years.
What I attempted with my first edition of trend following,
and with this newest edition,
is to lift the veil on this enormously successful strategy,
how trend followers trade
and what can be learned that anyone can apply to their portfolio for profit.
Throughout this effort, I avoided institutionalized knowledge,
as defined by Wall Street banks, brokers,
and typical long-only hedge funds.
I did not start with J.P. Morgan Chase or Goldman Sachs.
Instead, I asked questions across all types of sources
and then objectively, doggedly, and very slowly,
and even through some deep-throat help,
answers that made intuitive sense were revealed.
If there was one factor that motivated me to work in this manner,
it was childlike curiosity,
where you rip the toy open to find the motor and locate the essence.
For example, one of my earliest curiosities was about who profited
when a famed British bank collapsed,
making the front cover of Time magazine.
My research alone unearthed a connection between this bank
and a wildly successful trend follower now worth billions.
This trader's trend-following track record had me wondering,
how did he discover trend-following in the first place?
I also wanted to know who won
when a $2 billion hedge fund collapsed
and almost sank the entire global economy.
Why did the biggest banks on Wall Street,
the so-called smart guys in charge of your retirement,
invest $100 billion in this fund
when there was so much obvious risk?
Further, when I contrasted typical Wall Street losses during October 2008
to what trend-following made during the same time in the great Zero Sum game,
it was hard to grasp why few market players were aware of the strategy.
Other questions appeared,
how does trend-following win in the Zero Sum game of trading?
Why has it been the most profitable style of trading?
What is the philosophical framework of trend-following success?
What are the timeless principles?
What is the trend-following view of human behavior?
Why is it enduring?
Many trend-followers are still reclusive and extremely low-key.
One who has beaten the markets for over 40 years
works out of a quiet office in a Florida coastal town.
For Wall Street, this approach is tantamount to sacrilege.
It goes against all the customs, rituals, trappings, and myths
embedded in so-called success.
It is my hope that my narratives, backed by data,
will correct misconceptions of winning as a harried, intense,
workaholic, posted 24-7 in front of 12 monitors while downing Red Bull.
One of my sources who helped break apart this puzzle was Charles Faulkner.
He observed elite traders are almost floating above the world,
seeing it from a different perspective than the rest of other market participants.
His insights go straight to the core.
It doesn't matter what you think, it's what the market does that matters.
What matters can be measured, so keep refining your measurements.
You don't need to know when something will happen to know that it will happen.
Successful trading is a probabilistic business, so plan accordingly.
There is an edge to be gained in every aspect of your trading system.
Everyone is fallible, even you, so your system must take this into account.
Trading means losing as well as winning, something you must live with for success.
To adequately explain the genesis of this new edition, I need time travel.
You see, my public trend-following persona started in October 1996
with the launch of a simple four-page website.
Armed with a political science degree from George Mason University,
no connection to Wall Street or any fund,
and with zero academic respect or PhD credentials,
it seemed perfectly appropriate to create the first trend-following website.
And I did.
Loaded with original content, that rudimentary-looking site,
turtletrader.com, generated millions of views, millions of dollars,
and, unbeknownst to me at the time,
respect among legions of beginner and professional traders alike.
Six years into that website, I decided it was time for a book,
or maybe the book decided it was time for me.
Larry Harris, the finance chair at the University of Southern California,
randomly emailed me.
He wanted me to review his new book
because I was driving more interest in his white paper,
the winners and losers of the Zero Sun game, than anyone else.
Without skipping a beat, I said sure to a review of his book,
but asked for an introduction to his publisher, since I was writing a book, too.
He obliged and connected me, even though my book at that moment was conceptual.
After two years of starts and stops, trend-following was finally ready.
And when the first edition hit the streets in April 2004,
I had no idea whether it would sell ten or ten thousand copies.
But immediately, the book made an under-the-radar splash,
landing in Amazon's Top 100 of all books.
In fact, that first edition was so expected to fail by my first publisher,
you could only get it online, initially no bookstore.
It went on to sell over a hundred thousand copies,
with translations into German, Korean, Japanese, Chinese, Arabic,
French, Portuguese, Russian, Thai, and Turkish.
Its success led to four more books,
and the opportunity to direct a documentary film over the course of 2007-2009.
I never expected an obscure trading book,
first written thirteen years ago,
would lead me to conversations with five Nobel Prize winners,
or face-to-face learnings from trading legends
Boone Pickens, David Harding, Ed Sekoda, and literally hundreds more.
This journey also led me to the world's top behavioral economists and psychologists,
from Daniel Kahneman and Robert Cialdini to Steven Pinker.
And it opened the door to my podcast, which has run since 2012
and now has over five million listens.
My podcast has further featured guests ranging from Tim Ferriss
to paleontologist Jack Horner of Jurassic Park fame,
all connected philosophically to trend-following thinking, at least in my mind.
Yet this wild ride has been far more than one-on-one conversations.
This serendipity of trend-following has led me around the world
before live audiences in Chicago, New York City, Beijing, Hong Kong,
Kuala Lumpur, Macau, Shanghai, Singapore, Tokyo, Paris, Vienna, and Sao Paulo.
A speaking gig in front of fifteen hundred native German speakers at the Hofburg Palace,
the former imperial palace in Vienna, Austria. That happened.
And it kept going.
Audiences with China Asset Management to Singapore's sovereign wealth fund GIC
to regular investor audiences with well over a thousand people.
Everyone from new investor to pro who wanted to learn more about trend-following
all allowed me to come into their world.
But I recall my first public presentation in support of trend-following,
Fall 2004 at Leg Mason's headquarters in Baltimore,
where their chief market strategist had invited me to lunch.
Afterward, I was escorted up a flight of stairs to a nondescript door.
Upon entering the room, I found it filled with young bankers listening to a speaker.
Michael Mobison, then Leg Mason's chief investment strategist, motioned for me to sit.
I instantly recognized the speaker as Bill Miller,
then the fund manager of Leg Mason Value Trust.
At the time, Miller had beaten the S&P 500 Index for fourteen straight years
and was easily one of Wall Street's most successful and famed players.
Miller then introduced me to the audience.
Until that moment, I had no idea I was up next.
For the next hour, Miller from one side of the room
and Mobison from the other side,
alternately peppered me with questions about trend-following,
risk management, and the turtle traders.
After the presentation, I thanked Miller for the opportunity to make my case
but wanted to know how he learned about trend-following.
He said, I surf Amazon for all types of books.
I came across yours, bought it, liked it,
and told all my people at Leg Mason they should read it.
At that moment, I knew trend-following might be catching on a little,
at least in some very rarefied circles.
Forget sales, which were very good.
I knew that if trend-following's message had struck a chord with Miller,
who was not trading as a trend-follower,
I might be on to something life-changing.
However, it is time to bring this living work forward to 2017
and a whole new audience and generation,
for I have barely dented the broad consciousness of global investors.
Roughly $80 trillion of investable assets
sit squarely at the mercy of EMT
inside buy-and-hold and or passive-index funds
with only a quarter of one percent of assets in trend-following strategies.
Almost everyone's savings and retirement monies
are literally a slave to wobbly economic theory
that leaves the masses unprepared for the next smackdown.
That slavery is why I have yet again opened up the chest cavity on trend-following.
Not outpatient surgery to correct typos,
but open-heart surgery to add thousands of details.
Big picture to minutia that bulk up the original
to a new and improved Schwarzenegger on steroids edition.
For starters, trend-following is now divided into three sections.
One, trend-following's original chapters and principles,
updated and extended.
Two, trend-following interviews, new.
Seven interviews from pros illuminate trend-following's big picture
with the requisite finer details.
Three, trend-following research, new.
Research contributions that add to the trend-following conversation
for average investors, professionals and scholars.
This is my most radical and extended volume.
Content changes and editions are everywhere.
It's now three books in one.
I have added material in a way where you can take small steps
or go for the deep dive, starting on almost any page.
The tone is different too, toned down in some areas, toned up in others.
Some of my younger blank and vinegar was expunged and reformulated
to a new mature version while staying true to the heart and soul of my origins.
Last, some might complain that there is too much information, too much content,
and I am throwing the kitchen sink at the subject.
If so, I will be happy with that criticism.
Guilty as charged.
Now, if you're looking for guru secrets or easy money riches,
please head on back to that OxyContin bender.
There is no such thing.
If you're in the mood for outlandish predictions, stories about the ultimate gut trader,
or what it's like to work inside a Wall Street bank,
or if you want to complain life is unfair and beg for the government to save you with a bailout,
no one can help you on your path to irrelevance.
Or worse yet, if you maintain faith in EMT,
steadfastly refusing to consider overwhelming contradictory evidence,
maybe you can burn me in effigy along with Bouchot and Harding.
If you fit any of these problematic profiles,
there is a good chance my words and my politically incorrect perspective
will give you an aneurysm.
Turn me off now.
In the alternative, if you want outside of the box different,
the truth of how outsized returns are made without any fundamental predictions or forecasts,
this is it.
And if you want the honest, data-driven proof,
I expect my digging will give everyone the necessary confidence
to break their comfort addiction to the box they already know
and go take a swing at making a fortune in bull, bear, and black swan markets.


# Chapter 3

These are the side margin quotations for the preface.
Nearly every time I strayed from the herd I've made a lot of money.
Wandering away from the action is the way to find the new action.
Jim Rogers
To receive my free interactive Trend Following presentation,
send a picture of your receipt to receipt at trendfollowing.com
Question
Do you pencil it in first?
Answer
No, you just start wrong.
Question
Question
But don't you make mistakes?
Answer
There is no such thing as a mistake.
A mistake is an opportunity to do something else.
You have to leave it and let nature take its course.
Ralph Steadman
British artist, best known for his work with American author Hunter S. Thompson,
talking to Anthony Bourdain.
The efficient market theory is about two questions.
Can the market be beat and is the market price the right price?
First, evidence says the market can be beat.
Second, debating the right or wrong price is futile.
There is only the market price,
and it's the most real, objective piece of data in finance.
Don't make the market a morality tale.
Michael Covell
When it is a question of money, everyone is of the same religion.
Voltaire
Proponents of the theory, EMT,
have never seemed interested in discordant evidence.
Apparently, a reluctance to recant and thereby to demystify the priesthood
is not limited to theologians.
Warren Buffett
The Warren Buffett Portfolio, 1999
Education rears disciples, imitators, and routineists,
not pioneers of new ideas and creative geniuses.
The schools are not nurseries of progress and improvement,
but conservatories of tradition and unvarying modes of thought.
Ludwig von Mises
You've got to guess at worst cases.
No model will tell you that.
My rule of thumb is double the worst that you have ever seen.
Cliff Asness
Fish see the bait, but not the hook.
Men see the prophet, but not the peril.
Chinese proverb
If you can't explain it simply, you don't understand it well enough.
Anonymous
To be aware how fruitful the playful mood can be
is to be immune to the propaganda of the alienated,
which extols resentment as a fuel of achievement.
Eric Hoffer
The credit bubble pushed the price of most financial assets
far from fundamental value.
The central bankers were rigging the market
with their asymmetric approach to market volatility,
where Alan Greenspan put a floor under the stock market,
but did not cap it with a ceiling.
That ensured that the cost of waiting until after the event
to clean up was unacceptably high.
Question
Some researchers argue that a market timing strategy
based on buy-sell signals generated by a 50 or 200-day moving average
offers a more appealing combination of risk and return
than a buy-and-hold approach.
What is your view?
Eugene Fama
An ancient tale with no empirical support.
I have noticed that everyone who ever told me
that the markets are efficient is poor.
Larry Heit
The essence of trend-following has been effective beyond my wildest dreams,
and for me it has been more risky to diversify away from it
than to embrace it wholeheartedly.
David Harding
Most big start-up breakouts are where people aren't paying attention.
Bill Gurley
If you're chasing the masses,
you're almost certainly heading the wrong direction.
The masses are ignoring you.
It's the weird who are choosing to pay attention
to seek out what they care about.
Seth Godin
It is necessary for you to learn from others' mistakes.
You will not live long enough to make them all yourself.
Hyman G. Rickover
The River Meanders Because It Can't Think
Richard Kenny
Trend synonyms
Tendency, movement, drift, swing, shift, course, current,
direction, progression, inclination, leaning, bias, bent.
The River Meanders


# Chapter 4

Section 1. Trend-Following Principles. Chapter 1. Trend-Following.
An object at rest stays at rest, and an object in motion stays in motion with the same speed
and in the same direction unless acted upon by an unbalanced force.
Newton's First Law of Motion. Speculation is dealing with the uncertain
conditions of the unknown future. Every human action is a speculation in that it is embedded
in the flux of time. Ludwig von Mises. Speculation.
It might sound pedantic, or perhaps that I am focusing on the extraneous. I am not. A speculator's
ability to receive a price they can count on as fact is the foundation of markets. Said
another way, with no price, humanity is back to cavemen beating each other with clubs.
An economist, Ludwig von Mises, puts price discovery's value in perspective.
It is the very essence of prices that they are the offshoot of the actions of individuals
and groups of individuals acting on their own behalf. The catalytic concept of exchange
ratios and prices precludes anything that is the effect of actions of a central authority,
of people resorting to violence and threats in the name of society, or the state, or
of an armed pressure group. In declaring that it is not the business of the government
to determine prices, we do not step beyond the borders of logical thinking. A government
can no more determine prices than a goose can lay hens' eggs.
Although government can't determine prices in the long run, in the short term government
will attempt to directly rig the market system via QE, ZURP, NURP, or whatever acronym
sure to follow. However, speculation is all there for making
choices about those market prices. Learning how best to speculate using prices is not
only a worthy endeavor, it is a survival of the fittest concept that traces back to the
earliest literature of Wall Street. From Young America on Wall Street, 1857, quoting
a French poem about a latter-day millionaire, Monday I started my land operations, Tuesday
owed millions by all calculations, Wednesday my brownstone palace began, Thursday I drove
out a spanking new span, Friday I gave a magnificent ball, Saturday smashed with just nothing
at all. There is nothing wrong with that turn of
events. It's normal. It's the expected up-and-down. Luck is always in play, but so is skill.
From the Theory of Stock Exchange Theory, 1874. A man who wins by haphazard speculation,
who chances to operate successfully until he has filled his pockets and retires with
his gains from so fascinating an arena, is one in a hundred. Anyone who knows anything
of stock exchange speculation will confirm the statement that, to the ordinary run of
man, the game is not worth the candle. There are, however, conditions under which speculation
in a market where ten or fifty thousand pounds can be lost in half an hour, may,
under given conditions, be systematically practiced profitably. First, and most important
perhaps of all those conditions, is the temperament of the speculator. When it is
known in a market that a great speculator is selling, weak bulls are speedily frightened
out, and when he has such an object in view, it is his game to intimidate with all the
force of his prestige and the power of his capital. Such a man must have a concrete hardness
of indifference through which nothing can penetrate to his heart. It is as necessary
to the success of his operations that he possesses no more regard for the feelings
or pockets of other people than a hungry tiger would for him if he were airing himself unconcernedly
in a Bengal jungle. He has a purpose in view, just as a surgeon has when the amputation
of a leg has been decided upon. The speculator's sole aim in the operation is the profit,
towards which he cuts his way regardless of the nature of the obstacles to be overcome,
just as the knife is plunged into the flesh, severing the arteries, muscles, and sinews
that surround the bone, which it is the object to reach and saw through. For a man to tread
a path in which he must systematically not only disregard the interest of other people,
but deliberately calculate upon the weaknesses of human nature which characterize the crowd,
in order to work upon them for his own ends, it is obvious that he must be constituted
in a quite exceptional manner, and not in a way that it is at all desirable others
should attempt to imitate, if uninitiated people who enter the arena in which some of
the professional speculators flourish were to spend some months in gathering information
and in close observation of the modus operandi so far as they could get to see and hear,
many of them would soon be persuaded that they were utterly useless at such work and
would retire thanking their stars. The haphazard man, who is the antithesis of the professional
character, will generally be found as differently constituted as are the results of his operations.
The man who makes a study and business of speculating, investigating every detail that
it seems necessary to probe until he has adapted it to the rest of his machinery, will be found
to be a hard-grained man, sailing very close to the wind, while your persistently haphazard
man is mostly a person of flabby character, and no less flabby mind, has easily frightened
off a line that he has set himself to follow in the innocence of a heart that expands
with the delusive consciousness of possessing power as a stray rabbit.
Such a class of man is to be found by hundreds in the haunts of the stock markets, and they
are always fidgeting in and out, first as little bulls and then as little bears, disappearing
after a sharp panic like flies from a joint of meat that is rudely disturbed by the
shop-boy, with the important difference that whereas the flies always get something,
the speculators invariably drop their money. From How to Win and How to Lose, 1883, arguably
the first trend-based market player arrives, the shrewdest operator ever known on the
London Stock Board was David Ricardo, 1772-1823, who amassed an enormous fortune. In advice
to a friend he sums up as the true secret of his success, the rule, every word of
which is golden, keep down your losses, never let them get away from you, let your
profits take care of themselves. That precept is huge, timeless. If you were to put Ricardo
into language of modern-day computer science 134 years later you would say, optimal stopping,
or win-stay, lose-shift, or A-B testing. More clarification from 1883 keeps the focus
on taking a loss. Speculation is looked upon as being so much more risky than other avocations
because its results are more sudden and startling, though not one whit more disastrous. Statistics
show that ninety-five out of one hundred men fail in mercantile life. The proportion
is not greater among speculators, quicker action is obtained whether it be favorable or
unfavorable, and it does not take five or ten years' time to find that you are playing
a losing game. No one is saying that attitude comes naturally. From The Art of Investing,
1888, then in theory it is so easy to win by speculation. To buy it a low figure and
sell it a higher, or to sell it a high figure and afterward buy it a lower, seems such a
simple operation. It almost looks as if you could go into Wall Street and pick up
money from the sidewalks. Intense study, practice, is the rock-solid foundation.
From Gold Bricks of Speculation, 1904. Speculation is inherent in the human constitution, and
men have a legal and moral right to speculate, provided they do so reasonably, intelligently,
and at their own risks. Reasonable speculation is such speculation as cannot seriously or
permanently affect the resources or position of the person indulging in it. Intelligence
speculation is such speculation as is indulged in only after a thorough investigation and
study of the subject of the speculation. The professional speculator is in the market
not for the purpose of either depressing or raising prices. He is as ready to make
money on a rise as on a fall in prices. In either case, he will try to ascertain
what the probable tendency of the market is before he embarks in any undertaking. No
speculator or clique of speculators, in their senses, would undertake to try to depress prices
in the face of a rising market. From Investments and Speculation, 1911, it is easy to see free
market capitalism and less government as optimal. Call it what you will. Speculation will
always be with us. Prudes may frown upon it. Superficial thinkers may confuse it with
the commonest forms of gambling. And sociologists may dream of the day when envy, ambition,
and covetousness will be a thing of the past and the human race can exist in peace without
these human traits. But their agitations and outcries can no more check speculation
than human ingenuity can devise a scheme to control the tides. What the blood is
to the human body, speculation is to business. It is absolutely a necessary part of it.
The only difference, if there is at all a difference, is in the form it assumes. What
would business be without incentive? In fact, incentive is all there is at the bottom of
speculation. Men are willing to take risks to acquire wealth. They are willing to stake
their capital upon opportunities which appeal to their judgment. From the pioneer who heedlessly
plunges into a trackless waste to find a new home with greater opportunities for the
acquisition of wealth, to the modern capitalist who, to control the trade and the given commodity,
plans gigantic trusts, is a long line of speculators, as speculation is behind all their ambitions.
The inventor who is, apparently, of all men the least of speculators, takes greatest
speculative chances, for he uses up time and energy to shape his ideas into some form
where they can be of practical use and, should he fail, has wasted them utterly
and lost all. Illustration after illustration could be given to demonstrate how speculation
in a greater or less degree enters into the material welfare of each individual. Without
speculation no business could progress. It is the dynamic power behind every incentive
to activity and progress. It is the desire for gain which prompts the inception of every
measure. If it is all that, then it can be readily seen how necessary speculation is.
In fact, speculation in its highest form has shaped the course of history and often changed
the map of the world. Intelligence speculation is no crime. It is not gambling. It is merely
pitting human shrewdness against the uncertainties of the future. For that matter, life itself
is a speculation in which ministers, prudes, and agitators hope to avoid sickness and accident
and live their allotted span of life. Between speculation and gambling there is as much
difference as there is between night and day. Speculation commands the exercise of the greatest
measure of acumen, where gambling trusts everything to luck and the turn of a card.
Experience has demonstrated, far too convincingly, that wherever speculation has been leashed by
the iron bonds of the law, the effect has been almost an immediate stoppage in the material
progress of the country. And finally, from psychology of the stock
market in 1912, one year before the Federal Reserve System was established, the Behavioral
School comes into focus. The psychological aspects of speculation may be considered from
two points of view, equally important. One question is, what effect do varying mental
attitudes of the public have upon the course of prices? How is the character of the market
influenced by psychological conditions? A second consideration is, how does the mental attitude
of the individual trader affect his chances of success? To what extent and how can he
overcome the obstacles placed in his pathway by his own hopes and fears, his timidities
and his obstinacies? This wisdom is clean, clear, and instantly
true for those awake. These days, however, speculation is often positioned as a pejorative
among the intelligentsia. While I enjoy Oliver Stone's outsider status, his film
Wall Street, Money Never Sleeps, 2010, paints speculation quite differently, as his film's
main character, Gordon Gekko, profanes. The mother of all evil is speculation. Stone is
not alone in making an enemy out of speculation. New Age guru Deepak Chopra makes the sweeping
generalization that, Wall Street is broken for sure because it succumbed to greed and
corruption and pure speculation with no values. Wall Street, the phrase, can mean anything.
If Chopra is talking big-bank bailouts, it is easy to agree with him. But pure speculation
practiced honestly is far from valueless. Politicians, too, love the sport of ripping speculators
an enduring ritual. United States socialist Bernie Sanders was predictable. I'm not too
much into speculation. The character Bobby Axelrod of Billions counters
Sanders. What have I done wrong, really? Except make money, succeed. All these rules and
regulations arbitrary, chalked up by politicians for their own ends. Axelrod is, of course,
a fictional fast-and-loose day trader built on inside information, but his words, words
uttered by many an honest man over the millennia, expose in raw form the hatred inferior minds
have toward speculation and reinforce it as a worthy endeavor, at least for those disconnected
from The Matrix. Winning versus losing. It is typical that general public equates
winning in the markets with abusing the financial market system. You know the horror stories,
so I won't overwhelm you. However, there are players with the utmost integrity who
achieve spectacular returns year after year. Examine their beliefs and self-perceptions,
and you will understand what keeps them honest. But before you examine their perspectives,
take a moment to consider your own. For example, at the end of the 1990s, or let's say
summer 2007, or even fall 2016 for that matter, when investors were feeling more secure financially
on paper, the you-know-what hit the fan or was about to, and by the time it was
over, they had lost significant money. They became angry with analysts, experts, brokers,
and money managers, whose advice they had guzzled down. Now they know they will not
meet their investment goals or come close to the mythological retirement. They have religiously
held on to their remaining investments, hoping they will eventually turn around. But 401k decisions
are paralyzing. They still believe indexing or buying and holding is the way to go. After
all, they've been sold that meme for decades. But now, as a final act of desperation, they
give up. They rationalize winning as only dumb luck.
Still, others lost even more in October 2008, but, win or lose, they enjoy the thrill
in the hopes of the one trade that makes them rich. Investing gurus, stock tips,
and all of that is their entertainment. Plus, they love to boast about their investments.
Ego needs attention, after all. Yes, they are depressed and angry when they lose. But when
they win, it feels terrific. It's the heroin-junkie high. Since their main goal is to invest for
quick profits, they will keep doing what they've always done. After all, there was
one time a few years ago when a tip made a nice profit they still dream about.
Stop. There is a much better way to think. Your approach becomes objective, moving as
close as you can to rational. You have enough confidence in your own decision-making that
you never seek out investment recommendations. You're content to wait patiently for the
right opportunity. And you're never too proud to buy a stock making new highs, even all-time
highs. For you, investing opportunities are market breakouts. Conversely, when wrong, you
exit immediately, no questions asked. You view loss as an opportunity to learn, move on,
and save money to play another day. Obsessing on the past is pointless. You approach trading
as a business, making note of what you buy or sell, and why, in the same matter-of-fact
way you balance your checkbook. By not personalizing your trading decisions, your emotional indecision
has the chance to decrease. The first perspective is that of a market loser, the latter a winner.
Don't be in a hurry to choose your approach until you know what the choice entails.
And look, don't be shy about it. You have to want the money. You have to want to get
ahead and be rich. The critic's condemnation, the player-hating, the ranked jealousy be damned.
Speculation is not only honorable, it is life. Profit-seeking speculation is the absolute
driving force of markets, and without it, there is only disintegration. Investor versus trader.
Wide swathes of the population think as investors in search of a bargain. However,
if you were to learn the most consistent market winners call themselves traders,
you would want to know why. Simply put, they don't invest. They trade.
Investors put their money or capital into a market, such as stocks or real estate,
with the assumption that value will always increase over time. I am long and never wrong.
As value increases, their investment and psychological reinforcement also increases.
But investors have no plan when their value drops. They hold on to their investment,
hoping the value will go back up. Investors succeed in bull markets and lose and bear markets,
like clockwork. This is because investors have zero plan to respond when losses mount.
They always choose to hang tight and continue to lose. And if mainstream press continually
positions investing is good or safe, and trading as bad or risky, average investors will be
reluctant to align themselves with trading. Better to trust the mutual fund and government
systems and fall asleep. A trader, on the other hand, has a defined
plan or strategy to put capital to work to achieve profit. Traders don't care what
they buy or what they sell as long as they end up with more money than their starting
sell. They are not investing in anything. They are trading. It is a critical distinction.
Trader Tom Basso believes a person is a trader whether or not he or she is trading. Some
mistakenly think they must be in and out of the markets every day to call themselves
traders. What makes someone a trader has more to do with their perspective on life
more than making a given trade. For example, a great trader's perspective must include
extreme patience. Like the African lion waiting days for the right moment to strike its
unsuspecting prey, great trading strategy can wait weeks or months for the right trade
with the right odds, and only then pull the trigger. Additionally, and ideally, traders
will go short as often as they go long, enabling them to make money in both up and
down markets. However, many traders won't or can't go short. They struggle with
the counterintuitive concept of making money on market declines. I would hope the
confusion associated with making money in down markets will dissipate, but it won't.
Human nature believes in only up, fundamental versus technical.
There are two basic trading theories. The first is fundamental analysis. It is the study
of external factors that affect the supply and demand. Fundamental analysis uses
factors such as Federal Reserve meetings, 24-7 news, weather reports, regulatory
knowledge, price earnings ratios, and balance sheet projections to make buy and sell
decisions. By monitoring all fundamentals, one can supposedly predict a change in
direction before that change has been reflected in the price of the market.
With the belief, you can then make money from that knowledge. That means you
can sit around, ponder the viability of Uber's autonomous car fleet, make your
bets on whatever markets, and the easy bling money rolls in. The vast majority
of Wall Street is fundamental analysis alone. They are the bankers, academics,
brokers, and analysts who always have an opinion or prediction, rain or shine.
Many of these Wall Street players have serenaded millions with fundamental
stories for decades. Gullible and naive investors buy into rosy fundamental
projections, riding bubbles straight up with no clue how to exit. Consider an
exchange with President George W. Bush before the Great Recession. Question. I'm
a financial advisor here in Virginia and I wanted to ask you what your
thoughts are on the market going forward for 2008 and if any of your
policies would make any difference. President Bush. No. Laughter. I'm not going
to answer your question. If I were an investor, I would be looking at the
basic fundamentals of the economy. Early on in my presidency, somebody asked me
about the stock market and I thought I was a financial genius and it was a
mistake. Laughter. The fundamentals of this nation are strong. One of the
interesting developments has been the role of exports and overall GDP growth.
When you open up markets for goods and services and we're treated fairly, we
can compete just about with anybody anywhere and exports have been an
integral part, at least to the third quarter growth. But far be it for me, I
apologize for not being in the position to answer your question, but I
don't think you want your President opining on whether the Dow Jones is
going to, laughter, be going up or down. The President's view is a cardboard
cutout of the type of fundamental view shared by the vast majority of
market participants. An excerpt from Yahoo Finance outlining a typical
market day is instantly familiar. It started off decent but ended up the
fourth straight down day for stocks. Early on, the indices were in the
green, mostly as a continuation from the bounce Monday afternoon, but as
the day wore on and the markets failed to show any upward momentum, the
breakdown finally occurred. The impetus this time was attributed to the
weakness in the dollar, even though the dollar was down early in the day
while stocks were up. Also, oil prices popped higher on wishful thinking
statements from a Venezuelan official about OPEC cutting production. Whether
or not these factors were simply excuses for selling or truly perceived
as fundamental factors hardly matters. Millions consume news or fake
news drivel such as this every minute, hour, day, year, and decade. Thousands
have watched the likes of CNBC's Jim Cramer's Mad Money Show promote
similar projections for what seems like decades, actually back to 2005. But
predictions based on fundamental analysis are a crapshoot guessing game, as you
will never know all fundamentals in what has become an ever-expanding fact
and factless society. But instead of helping people to understand news is not
at all critical to their money-making decision-making, politicians across the
globe are gearing up to stamp out the supposed scourge of fake news. For
example, State of California Assembly member Jimmy Gomez introduced Assembly
Bill AB 155 in 2017 to ensure that upcoming generations of online readers
possess the analytical skills needed to spot fake news. The bill would direct
the Instructional Quality Commission to develop and adopt curriculum standards
and frameworks that incorporate civic online reasoning for English language
arts, mathematics, history, social science, and science. Insert your own Orwellian
reference. Trader Ed's Dakota notes across-the-board cognitive dissonance in
play with a simple story. One evening while having dinner with a
fundamentalist, I accidentally knocked a sharp knife off the edge of the table.
He watched the knife twirl through the air as it came to rest with a pointed end
sticking into his shoe. Why didn't you move your foot? I exclaimed. I was
waiting for it to come back up, he replied. Everyone knows an investor
waiting for their market to come back, and it often never does. The financial
website Motley Fool has a backstory, a narrative behind its start that
reinforces the folly of fundamental analysis. It all started with chocolate
pudding. When they were young, brothers David and Tom Gardner learned about
stocks in the business world from their father at the supermarket. Dad, a lawyer
and economist, would tell them, see that pudding, we own the company that makes it.
Every time someone buys that pudding, it's good for our company, so go get
some more. The lesson stuck. The Motley Fool's David and Tom Gardner's
pudding story is cute, but it's misleading in design. Their plan gets you
in, but it doesn't get you out or tell you how much of that pudding stock you
should buy. Many low-information types believe that easy-to-digest narrative.
I can only scream inside my head, Houston, we have a freaking problem.
A second market theory, technical analysis, operates in stark contrast to the
fundamentals. This approach is based on the belief at any given point in time,
market prices reflect all known factors affecting supply and demand. Instead of
evaluating fundamental factors, technical analysis looks at the market
prices themselves. But an understanding of technical analysis can quickly
become confusing and controversial. There are essentially two forms of
technical analysis. One is based on an ability to read charts or use
indicators to predict market direction, and predictive technical analysis
rightly deserves poignant criticism. I often hear people swear they make
money with technical analysis. Do they really? The answer, of course, is that
they do. People make money using all sorts of strategies, including some
involving tea leaves and sunspots. The real question is, do they make more
money than they would investing in a blind index fund that mimics the
performance of the market as a whole? Most academic financial experts
believe in some form of the random walk theory and consider technical
analysis almost indistinguishable from a pseudoscience whose
predictions are either worthless or, at best, so barely discernibly
better than chance as to be unexploitable because of transaction costs.
This is the view of technical analysis held by most who think they
know of it, that it is a form of chart reading, astrology, moon
cycle analysis, chart pattern wiggle feelings, Elliott waves to the
first, second, third, fourth, and fifth degree, and Barry Ritholt's
favorite one to skewer, the death cross. Big bank equity research
departments add to confusion by asking the wrong question. The question
of whether technical analysis works has been a topic of contention
for over three decades. Can past prices forecast future performance?
It gets worse. Consider a recent red alert example from HSBC. The head and
shoulders top with the neckline acting as resistance comes on top of a
potentially bearish Elliott wave irregular flat pattern and the fact
that the index is now backing off from the old 2015 highs. A close
below 17,992 would be very bearish. Pressure would ease above 18,449.
Good luck with that. There is a second type of technical analysis
that neither predicts or forecasts. This type is based on reacting to
price action, as trend trader Martin Estlander notes. We identify
market trends. We do not predict them. Our models are kept reactive at
all times. Meban Faber expands on reaction by noting three criteria
are necessary for a model to be simple enough to follow, yet
mechanical enough to remove emotion and subjective decision-making.
One, simple, purely mechanical logic. Two, the same model and
parameters for every asset class. Three, price based only. Instead of
trying to predict market direction, an impossible chore, trend
following reacts to movements whenever they occur. This enables a
focus on the actual price risk while avoiding becoming emotionally
connected with direction, duration, and fundamental expectations.
This price analysis never allows entry at the exact bottom of a trend
or an exit at the exact top. And you won't necessarily trade every
day or week. Instead, trend following waits patiently for the
right conditions. There is no forcing an opportunity not there.
And with this view, there are not exact performance goals. Some
want a strategy that dictates, I must make $400 a day. The trend
following counter is, sure, but what if markets don't move on a
given day? Trend following works because you don't try to outthink
it. You are a trend follower, not a trend predictor. Discretionary
versus systematic. There are investors and traders, and trading
can be fundamentally or technically based. Further, technical
trading can either be predictive or reactive. However, there is
more distinction. Traders can be discretionary or mechanical.
Trader John W. Henry makes a clear distinction between the
two strategies. I believe that an investment strategy can only be
as successful as the discipline of the manager to adhere to the
requirements in the face of market adversity. Unlike
discretionary traders, whose decisions may be subject to
behavioral biases, I practice a disciplined investment process.
When Henry speaks of decisions that may be subject to behavioral
biases, he is referring to those who make their buy and sell
decisions on fundamentals, the current environment, or any number
of other whatever factors. It's a never-ending parade of data
they can supposedly sift through and utilize. In other words,
they use their discretion, hence the use of discretionary to
describe their approach. Decisions made at the discretion of
the trader can be changed or second-guessed nonstop. These
discretionary gut-trading decisions will be colored by
personal bias. I have yet to see a multi-decade track record
produced by gut-trading. It's 100% fantasy. Many imagine the
process is like a fighter pilot, strapped into the cockpit, armed
with an instinctive feel, or even an innate gift. It's not
that. Now, a trader's initial choice to launch a trading
system is discretionary. You must make discretionary decisions
such as choosing a system, selecting your portfolio, and
determining a risk percentage. Some would argue even these
aspects can be made systematically too. However, after
you've decided on the system orientation basics, you can
systematize these discretionary decisions and make them
mechanical. Mechanical or systematic trading systems are
based on objective rules. Traders put rules into computer
programs to get in, buy, and out, sell of a market. A
mechanical trading system eliminates emotional
vacillation. It forces discipline to stick with the
process. If you rely on mechanical trading system rules
and break them with discretion, you are guaranteed to go broke.
Henry puts into perspective the downsides of discretionary
thinking. Unlike discretionary traders, whose decisions may
be subject to behavioral biases, we practice a disciplined
investment process. By quantifying the circumstances
under which key investment decisions are made, our
methodology offers investors a consistent approach to
markets, unswayed by judgmental bias. Maybe it is rigid to say
it's against the rules to use a little discretion. You
might think, how boring to live like a CPA. Where's the fun if
all you ever do is follow a mechanical model? Successfully
making fortunes isn't about excitement. It's about winning.
A researcher at Campbell & Company, one of the oldest
and most successful trend-following firms, is
adamant. One of our strengths is to follow our models and not
use discretion. This rule is written in stone at
Campbell. Trend trader Ewan Kirk adds,
systematic trading involves coming up with a statistical model of the markets.
Assuming that model has worked in the past and that you have developed and
researched and tested your model correctly,
then your hypothesis is that it's likely to keep working in the future.
So, the actual execution of trades is just continuing to follow what the model
says. Now, that sounds quite mechanical. In fact,
it's no different from the way any good investor works.
Why would you invest with Warren Buffett? Because, over the past 30 years,
Warren Buffett has made money and you're assuming that's going to continue in
the future. Conceptually, that's no different than
what we do. Traders Todd Hurlbut and Ted Parkhill
further note the perils and discretion. We are systematic.
We have seen examples where managers either start to doubt and then start
tinkering, so there is what today is called style
shift, or worse, when a manager dramatically
changes the approach to what could be called style flip,
hiding in plain sight. Trend following, and assorted derivatives of price-based
trading, is not a new concept. It goes back
across names like David Ricardo, Jesse Livermore,
Richard Wyckoff, Arthur Cutton, Charles Dow, Henry Cluze,
William Dunnigan, Richard Doncian, Nicholas Darvus,
Amos Hostetter, and Richard Russell. Believe it or not,
it literally goes back centuries with data to prove it.
See Chapter 19 and 20 in Section 3, Trend Following Research.
AQR's Cliff Asness clarifies. Historically, it's been a
strategy pursued primarily by futures traders and in the last 10 to
20 years by hedge funds. The trading strategy employed by most
managed futures funds boils down to some type of trend following strategy,
which is also known as momentum investing. Even traders not typically
associated with trend following eventually find their way.
In hedge fund market wizards, Jack Schwager asked
Ed Thorpe, an American mathematics professor, author,
hedge fund manager, and blackjack player, best known as the
father of the wearable computer, if he believed,
there are trends inherent in the markets. Thorpe replied,
yes, 10 years ago, I wouldn't have believed it. But a few years ago, I
spent a fair amount of time looking at the strategy.
My conclusion was that it works, but that it was risky enough
so that it was hard to stay with it. Thorpe noted he used trend following
too, and so it goes. Price-based trend strategies
discovered by new and old generations at different times.
Salem Abraham, now an established trend following veteran,
began researching the markets in his early 20s by asking a simple question.
Who is making money? His answer was trend followers
and his journey. Still, not many have made the journey.
During the dot-com era of the late 1990s, throughout the Fed-induced
S&P run-up after March 2009, and even today into 2017,
many with zero strategy have made money in other ways,
so trend following becomes a blip on the radar screen,
seemingly not so important. And since trend following has nothing to do
with high-frequency trading, short-term trading, cutting-edge
technologies, or Wall Street hocus-pocus nonsense, its appeal is universally lost
during extraordinary delusions unleashed inside the madness of crowds.
That is, until bubbles pop. Trend following is not
sexy until the masses get poached and bleed out.
Nonetheless, if you look at how much money trend following has made before,
during, and after assorted market bubbles, it becomes far more relevant to the bottom
line of astute market players. Yet, even when over-the-top
trend following success is thrown onto the table,
skeptical investors can be tough cells. They might say markets have changed and
trend following no longer works. But philosophically, trend following
hasn't changed and won't change, even though markets might not always
cooperate. Let's put change in perspective.
Markets behave the same as they did hundreds of years ago.
In other words, markets are the same today because they always change.
Humans are involved, after all. This behavioral view is the philosophical
underpinning of trend following. A few years ago, for example, the German
mark had significant trading volume. Then, the euro replaced the mark.
This was a huge change, yet a typical one.
If you are flexible and have a plan of attack, a solid strategy,
market changes, like changes in life, won't kill you.
Trend followers traded the mark. Now, they trade the euro.
That's how to think. Accepting the inevitability of change
is an initial step to understanding. One trend follower elaborates,
but what won't change? Change. When a period of difficult
performance continues, however, most investors' natural conclusion
is that something must be done to fix the problem.
Having been through these drawdowns before, we know that they are
unpleasant, but they do not signal that something is necessarily wrong
with the future. During these periods, almost everyone asks
the same question in these exact words. Have the markets changed?
I always tell them the truth. Yes. Not only have they changed,
but they will continue to change as they have throughout history.
Trend following presupposes change. It is based on change.
Markets, of course, are built by design to go up, down, and sideways.
They trend or chop. They flow or don't. They are consistent, and they are
surprise. No one accurately can forecast a trend's beginning or end
until it becomes a matter of record. However, if your trading
strategy is designed to adapt, you can take advantage of changes.
If you have a valid basic philosophy, the fact that things change turns
out to be a benefit. At least you can survive. At the very least,
you will survive over the long term. But if you don't have a valid
basic philosophy, you won't be successful because change will
eventually kill you. I knew I could not predict anything, and that
is why we decided to follow trends, and that is why we've been so
successful. We simply follow trends, no matter how
ridiculous those trends appear to be at the beginning, and no
matter how extended or how irrational they seem at the end, we
follow trends. A valid basic philosophy means a trading
strategy that can be defined, quantified, written down, and
measured in terms of numbers. Trend following does not guess at
buys and sells. It knows what to do because valid basic
philosophy is codified into a specific plan for all
contingencies. The man group, one of the largest trend
following traders, describes the source behind their profits.
Trends as a persistent price phenomenon that stems from changes
in risk premiums, the amount of return investors demand to
compensate the risks they're taking. Risk premiums vary
massively over time in response to new market information,
changes in economic environment, or even intangible factors such
as shifts in investor sentiment. When risk premiums decrease or
increase, underlying assets have to be priced again. Because
investors typically have different expectations, large
shifts in markets result over several months or even years
as expectations are gradually adjusted. As long as there is
uncertainty about the future, there will be trends for trend
followers to capture. Change is life. Patrick Welton saw no
evidence trend following has devolved. He constructed 120
trend following models. Some were reversal-based and some
not. Some were breakout-style trading systems based on price
action, and others relied on volatility and band-style
breakouts. The average holding periods ranged from
two weeks to one year. The results gave almost identical
performance characteristics. Welton addressed head-on the
misconception that the sources of return for trend
following had changed. He pointed out, starting from first
principles, it was a fact the source of return for trend
following resulted from sustained market price
movements. Human reaction to such events, read Daniel
Kahneman, and the stream of information describing them,
takes time and runs its course unpredictably. The
resulting magnitude and rate of price change could not be
reliably forecast. This is the precise reason why trend
following works. One fund consultant confronted trend
trading skeptics decades before trend following's huge
October 2008 positive returns. In the 1980s, on a tour of
Germany sponsored by the Deutsche Termanborsa, several
advisors and pool operators were making a presentation to
a group of German institutional investors. Among them were two
trend-based traders, Campbell and John W. Henry. During
the question and answer period, one man stood and
proclaimed, but isn't it true that trend following is
dead? At this point, the moderator asked that slides
displaying the performance histories for Campbell and
Henry be displayed again. The moderator marched through
the decline, saying, here's the first obituary for
trend-based trading, here's the next one, and the
next, but these traders today are at new highs, and
they consistently decline to honor the tombstones that
skeptics keep erecting every time there's a losing
period. Campbell and Henry have made their investors
hundreds of millions of dollars since that time. It
might, therefore, be a mistake to write yet another
series of obituaries. Like sunrise, sunset, you can
always expect a new trend following obituary, oblivious
to the data, and rooted in purposeful ignorance
will be written every few years by an agenda-driven
press, EMT defenders, and player haters despite the
incredible amounts of money made by trend-following
practitioners. Perplexed at Wall Street's lack of
acceptance, one trend-follower sees the danger in trying
to be right. How can someone buy high and short
low and be successful for two decades unless the
underlying nature of the markets is to trend? On
the other hand, I've seen year after year brilliant
men buying low and selling high for a while
successfully and then going broke because they
thought they understood why a certain investment
instrument had to perform in accordance with their
personal logic. Trend-following trader Paul
Mulvaney made the point, One thing to bear in mind
is that we have made no changes to our trend-following
strategy since 2005. So in a way, we take the
ancient Spartan view that everything that needed
to be said about long-term trend-following has
already been said, he continued. In recent years,
our research has focused on execution algorithms,
but those are of minor importance versus the
strategic trend-following philosophy. You can
find Mulvaney's philosophy in performance data
format in the supplemental PDF. Mark Spitznagel, a
trader focused on Tails and a close associate of
Nassim Taleb, would characterize Mulvaney's
returns as lumpy with extreme asymmetric payoffs,
exactly how he would refer to his trading world.
And whether using Spitznagel's strategy or
Mulvaney's go-for-the-gusto high-octane
strategy, an opportunistic plan of attack knows
you aim to lose battles but win the war.
Let me be clear, though. Mulvaney's track
record is but one example for industrious types
to go reverse engineer, to learn step-by-step
how those volatile but overall up-numbers
came to be. His performance table is an
initial shot across the bow to bring you
into the trend-following month-to-month
mindset of no benchmarks. But trend-following
is much more than one trend-following track
record alone. This strategy has performed
consistently for more than a century across
an untold number of traders. And the reasons
to explain why markets have tended to
trend more often than not include investors
behavioral biases, market frictions, hedging
demands, and never-ending market
interventions launched by central banks
and governments. Follow the trend to the
end when it bends. In an increasingly
uncertain and downright unfriendly world,
it is extremely efficient and effective to
base decision-making on the single,
simple, reliable truth of price.
The 24-7 never-ending fundamental data
barrage, such as price-earning ratios,
crop reports, and economic studies, plays
right into the tendency to make trading
more complicated than it need be.
Yet by factoring in every possible
fundamental piece of data, which is
impossible, you still would not know how
much and when to buy, or how much and
when to sell. The truth of price always
wins if the debate is grounded in reason.
Price is the only fact.
That said, even if you digest price as
the key trading variable, it is not
unusual for traders to focus on only one
market, usually individual stocks in their
home country to the exclusion of all
other global opportunities.
Seeking a maximum degree of comfort,
many follow their one familiar market's
movements faithfully every day.
They never dream of branching out into
currencies or futures or coffee or gold.
The idea you could know enough about
Tesla and soybeans to trade them the
same might be unfathomable.
But think about what cotton, crude oil,
Cisco, GE, the US dollar, the Australian
dollar, wheat, Apple, Google, and Berkshire
Hathaway all have in common.
Price action. Market prices, traded
prices, are the unequivocal objective
data reflecting the sum total of all
views. Accepting that truth allows you
to compare and study prices,
measuring their movements, even if you
don't know a damn thing about
fundamentals. You could absolutely look
at individual price histories or charts
without knowing which market is which
and trade them successfully.
That is not what they teach you at
Harvard or Wharton, but it is the
foundation of making millions as a trend
following trader.
Further, don't try to guess how far a
trend will extend.
You can't. You will never know how
high or how low any market might go.
Peter Borish, former second in command
with Paul Tudor Jones, lays bare the
trader's only concern.
Price makes news, not the other way
around. A market is going to go where a
market is going to go.
The concept of price as the paramount
trading signal is too simple for
Wall Street to accept.
This confusion or misinformation is seen
across the mainstream press where they
always emphasize the wrong numbers.
Bill Griffith of CNBC.
At some point, investing is an act of
faith. If you can't believe the numbers,
annual reports, etc., what numbers can
you believe?
He misses the point. It doesn't matter
whether you can or cannot believe an
earnings statement.
All of those numbers can be doctored,
fixed, cooked, or faked.
The traded market price can't be
fixed.
It's the only number you can believe.
You can see it every day. However,
this does not diminish confusion.
Alan Sloan, a finance reporter, doesn't
get it.
If some of the smartest people on
Wall Street can't trust the numbers,
you wonder who can trust the numbers.
I know Sloan is droning on about
balance sheets and price earnings
ratios.
You can't trust those numbers. Ever.
Bad actors can always alter them.
Even if you knew accurate balance
sheet numbers, that info doesn't
necessarily correlate with buying and
selling at the right time.
A critical lesson from an old pro-
trend trader.
Political uncertainty is one reason why
investment decisions are not driven by
discretionary judgments.
How, for example, do you measure the
impact of statements from central
bankers and treasury chiefs?
Even if we knew all the linkages
between fundamentals and prices,
unclear policy comments would limit
our ability to generate returns.
Trying to interpret the tea leaves in
Humphrey Hawkins' testimony or the
minds of Japanese policy authorities
does not lend itself to disciplined
systematic investing.
Instead of trying to play a loser's
game of handicapping policy
statements,
our models let market prices do the
talking.
Prices may be volatile, but they do
not cloud the truth in market
reactions.
Our job is to systematically shift
price data to find trends and act on
them, and not let the latest news
flashes sway our market opinions.
William Eckhart, a trend follower and
former partner of Richard Dennis,
see my book, Turtle Trader,
describes how price is to live and die
by.
An important feature of our approach is
that we work almost exclusively with
price, past and current.
Price is definitely the variable
traders live and die by,
so it is the obvious candidate for
investigation.
Pure price systems are close enough to
the North Pole that any departure tends
to bring you farther south.
Understanding how a trend follower
implements that philosophy
is illustrated in Ed Zekota's sugar
story.
He had been buying sugar, thousands of
sugar futures contracts,
and every day the market was closing
limit up.
Every day the market was going
non-stop higher and higher.
Zekota kept buying more and more
sugar each day limit up.
An outside broker was watching all of
Zekota's action,
and one day the broker called him
after the market closed,
and since he had extra contracts of
sugar that were not balanced out,
he said to Zekota,
I bet you want to buy these other
5,000 contracts of sugar.
Zekota replied, sold.
After the market closes limit up for
days in a row,
Zekota says,
Sure, I'll buy more sugar contracts
at the absolute top of the market.
Everybody instinctively wants to buy
sugar on the dip or on the
retracement.
Let it come down lower, they pine.
I want a bargain,
is their thinking,
even if the bargain never appears.
Trend following works by doing the
opposite.
It buys higher highs and sells short
lower lows.
Good traders confuse price.
The trading histories of Julian
Robertson and Lewis Bacon,
two famed hedge fund titans,
underscore the importance of price for
decision-making.
After the dot-com crisis,
Julian Robertson shut his long-running
hedge fund down.
He was a global macro trader who
relied on fundamentals for
decision-making.
Robertson had a close relationship
with another global macro trader,
Lewis Bacon.
Bacon was extremely secretive to the
extent that it was nearly impossible
to find out his performance numbers
unless you were a client.
Although Bacon did not advertise
himself as a trend follower,
he was focused on price action.
If a stock goes from 100 to 90,
an investor who looks at
fundamentals would think maybe
it's a better buy.
But with Lewis Bacon,
he will figure he must have been
wrong about something and get out.
Contrast that, say,
with Julian Robertson,
who, even after shutting down his
firm,
was doggedly holding on to massive
positions in such stocks as U.S.
Airways Group and United Asset
Management Corp.
Bacon made the comment,
in an investor letter, that
those traders with a futures
background are more sensitive to
market action,
whereas value-based equity traders
are trained to react less to the
market and focus much more on their
assessment of a company's or
situation's viability.
Every successful trader is a trend
follower,
even if they don't use the technique,
admit it, or know it.
Trend followers know to pick the
trend start is a masochistic
exercise.
When trends start, they often come
from flat markets that don't appear
to be trending anywhere.
It's choppy, up and down,
trendless,
go-nowhere market action.
The solution is to take small bets
early to see if the trend will
mature
and get big enough to ride.
An executive at trend-following
pioneer Graham Capital Management
clarifies,
the ability of trend-following
strategies to succeed depends on
two obvious but important
assumptions about markets.
First, it assumes that price trends
occur regularly in markets.
Secondly, it assumes that trading
systems can be created to profit
from those trends.
The basic trading strategy that
all trend-followers try to
systematize is to cut losses and
let profits run.
I asked Charles Faulkner to expand.
The first rule of trading is to cut
your losses and let your profits
run,
and then that it's the hardest
thing to do.
Sell them to any of them wonder why,
and yet this is exactly where the
efficient market theory breaks down
and the psychological nature of the
markets shows through.
When we lose or misplace something,
we expect to find it later.
The cat comes back.
We find our car keys,
but we know a dollar on the street
will not be there with the next
person who passes by.
So experience teaches us that losses
are unlikely
and gains are hard.
A bird in the hand is worth two in
the bush.
This is when I tell them that they
earn their trading profits by doing
the hard thing,
by going against human nature.
This is where the discipline comes in,
the psychological preparation,
the months of system testing that give
the trader the confidence to actually
trade against his natural tendencies.
If cutting losses and letting profits
run
is the trend-following mantra,
it is because harsh reality dictates
you can't play the game if you run
out of money.
No money, no honey.
Trend trader Christopher Cruden
sarcastically builds the thought,
I would prefer to finish with a certain
currency forecast
based upon my own fundamental reading
of the market
and one that underpins my personal
investment philosophy.
The only problem is I can't tell you
when this will happen
or which event will be first.
On that basis alone,
it seems best to stay with our
systematic approach.
A good example of not letting profits
run
can be seen in trading strategies
that take profits off the table
before the trend is over.
For example, one broker told me
one of his strategies was to ride
a stock up
for a 30% gain and then exit.
That was his strategy.
Let it go up 30%
and get out.
Sounds reasonable?
However, a strategy that uses
profit targets is problematic
at a root level.
It goes swear against the math
of getting rich,
which is always without question
to let your profits run.
If you can't predict the end
or top of a trend,
don't get out early
and risk leaving profits
on the table.
You will need the biggest winners
after all to pay for
the smaller losers.
For example, let's say you start
with $50,000.
The market takes off
and your account swells to $80,000.
You could, at this point,
quickly pull your $30,000 profit
off the table.
Your wrong thinking is if you
don't take these profits
immediately, they will be gone.
Trend followers know
that a $50,000 account
may go up to $80,000,
back to $55,000,
back up to $90,000,
and from there,
perhaps all the way up
to $200,000.
The person who took profits
at $80,000 is not around
to take the ride up
to $200,000.
Letting your profits run
is tough psychologically,
but understand in trying
to protect every penny
of your profit,
you never make big profits.
Those are the stark choices
for the big boy game.
You are going to have ups
and downs in your trading account.
Get over it.
Losses are a part
of the trading game
no matter the strategy.
If you want no losses,
if you want positive returns
every month,
well, you could have your money
with the Ponzi scheme
of Bernard Madoff
and his fake monthly 1% performance,
but you know how that turned out.
You can't make money
if you are not willing to lose.
It's like breathing in,
but not willing to breathe out.
Think of it this way.
If you don't have losses,
you are not taking risks.
If you don't risk,
you won't ever win big.
Losses aren't the problem.
You must always cut them,
ignore losses with no plan,
let them build up,
and they will come back
to wipe out your account.
Theoretically, really big losses
rarely befall trend following strategy
because it eliminates
or reverses positions
as soon as the market goes against it.
The rationale for hanging in
is that any price move
could be the beginning of a trend
and the occasional big breakout
justifies a string of small losses.
Surf the waves.
I am fortunate to have learned
from trader Ed Zucota
starting in 2001
with our first Virgin Islands meeting
through a 2012 panel
with Larry Hight
and up to his 2016 podcast appearance,
but early on he told me a story
about being in Bermuda
with a new trader
who wanted secrets.
Give me the quick and dirty version
of your magical trading secrets,
the neophyte beamed.
Zucota took the new trader
out to the beach.
They stood there watching the waves
break against the shoreline.
The newbie asked,
What's your point?
Zucota said,
Go down to the shoreline
where the waves break.
Now begin to time them.
Run out with the waves
as they recede
and run in as the waves come in.
Can you see how you could get
into rhythm with the waves?
You follow the waves out
and you follow them in.
You follow their lead.
The truth of trend following
is its philosophical underpinnings
are relevant not only to trading
but to life in general
from business
to personal relationships.
The old pro trend followers
were clear with me
in their words and actions.
Trend following works best
when pursued with the right
mindset and unbridled passion.
First, consider the role
of proper mindset.
As Stanford psychologist
Carol Dweck teaches,
in a fixed mindset,
people believe their basic qualities
like their intelligence or talent
are simply fixed traits.
They spend their time
documenting their intelligence
or talent instead of developing them.
They also believe that talent
alone creates success
without effort.
They're wrong.
In a growth mindset,
people believe that
their most basic abilities
can be developed
through dedication and hard work.
Brains and talent
are just the starting point.
This view creates a love of learning
and a resilience
that is essential
for great accomplishment.
Virtually all great people
have had these qualities.
Second, trading coach
and psychologist Brett Steenbarger
argues the passion point.
Find your passion.
The work that stimulates,
fascinates, and endlessly challenges you.
Identify what you find meaningful
and rewarding
and pour yourself into it.
If your passion happens
to be the markets,
you will find the fortitude
to outlast your learning curve
and to develop the mastery needed
to become a professional.
If your passion is not the markets,
then invest your funds
with someone who possesses
an objective track record
and whose investment aims
to match your own.
Then go forth
and pour yourself
into those facets of life
that will keep you
springing out of bed each morning,
eager to face each day.
In my experience,
it became crystal clear
when used within the context
of mindset and passion.
The term trend following
can be substituted in this edition
for other aspects of life.
That insight crystallized
in a passage
from Brenda Ulin's 1938 book
on creative writing.
Whenever I say writing in this book,
I also mean anything you love
and want to do or to make.
It may be a six-act tragedy
in blank verse.
It may be dressmaking
or acrobatics
or inventing a new system
of double-entry accounting.
But you must be sure
that your imagination
and love are behind it.
That you are not working
just from grim resolution,
i.e., to impress people.
Successful trend followers
don't trade with grim resolve
or with the intention to impress.
They are playing a game to win
and enjoying every moment of it.
Like other high-level performers,
think professional athletes
and world-class musicians,
they understand how critical it is
to maintain a winning attitude
for success.
And as Larry Heit told me,
good trend following traders
ask questions.
The first question
you have to ask yourself,
who are you?
I'm not kidding.
And don't look
at your driver's license.
But what you got to say
to yourself,
what am I comfortable doing?
Am I an arbitrageur?
Am I a short-term trader?
It is really important
that you understand
who you are
and what you want to do.
The next thing
you have to ask yourself,
one of the real details,
what are you going to do?
What are you going to do exactly?
What has to be done?
Is it hard to you?
Is it easy?
Do you have the materials to do it?
One of the great things
about the market
is the markets
don't care about you.
The market doesn't care
what color you are.
The markets don't care
if you are short or tall.
They don't care about anything.
They don't care
whether you leave or stay.
The last question
you have to ask yourself,
what follows?
You have to ask yourself,
if I do this and it works,
where am I?
What have I got?
Now, what I've said
may really sound
like it's pretty simple
and common sense.
But think about
the failed hedge fund
long-term capital management.
Those were some very,
very smart people,
Nobel Prize winners,
who did some pretty stupid things.
And they did it
because they didn't ask themselves
the basic questions.
Armed with Heights Marching Orders,
let's dive deeper
into what it takes
for trend-following excellence.
Summary food for thought.
Galileo Galilei.
All truths are easy to understand
once they are discovered.
The point is to discover them.
Hendrik Houthecker, 1961.
Price changes are not purely random,
but follow certain
longer-run trends.
Inspired by Benoit Mandelbrot,
Houthecker was an early EMT critic.
Ed Zekota.
All profitable systems trade trends.
The difference in price necessary
to create the profit
implies a trend.
Prices, not traders,
predict the future.
If you don't have losses,
you are not taking risks.
If you don't risk,
you can't win anything.
Price goes either up,
down, or sideways.
No advance in technology,
leap of modern science,
or radical shift in perception
will alter this fact.
What if they told you
the best way to get to point B,
without bumping into walls,
would be to bump into walls
and not worry about it?
Don't worry about getting to point B,
but enjoy bumping into walls.
Trend-following strategy
is not for trading alone.
The MIT Blackjack team
led by Mike Aponte,
podcast episode number 22,
pursued very similar strategies,
as do venture capitalists
like Mark Andreessen.
Film producer Jason Blum
also uses an edge-seeking strategy
to produce films.
To receive my free
interactive trend-following presentation,
send a picture of your receipt
to receipt at
trendfollowing.com.


# Chapter 5

These are the side margin quotations for Chapter 1.
The aim is to make money, not to be right.
Ned Davis.
The people that I know who are the most successful at trading are passionate about it.
They fulfill what is the first requirement, developing intuitions about something they
care about deeply, in this case trading.
Charles Faulkner.
Who will check the fact checkers?
Who will watch the watchmen?
Anonymous.
Too many people simply give up too easily.
You have to keep the desire to forge ahead, and you have to be able to take the bruises
of unsuccessful success.
Success is just one long street fight.
Milton Burrell.
A study on human behavior shows ninety percent of the population can be classified into four
basic personality types, optimistic, pessimistic, trusting, and envious.
Envious, at thirty percent, is the most common.
Universidad Carlos III.
de Madrid.
The free market punishes irresponsibility.
Government rewards it.
Harry Brown.
The absolute number doesn't matter.
It's the trend over time.
Seth Godin.
Gaslighting is a form of manipulation that seeks to sow seeds of doubt in a targeted
individual or members of a group, hoping to make targets question their own memory, perception,
and sanity.
Wikipedia.
The joy of winning and the pain of losing are right up there with the pain of winning
and the joy of losing.
Also to consider are the joy and pain of not participating.
The relative strengths of these feelings tend to increase with the distance of the trader
from his commitment to being a trader.
Ed Saccota.
If you think education is expensive, try ignorance.
Derrick Bach.
Nothing has changed during the twenty-one years, over forty years now, we've been
managing money.
Government regulation and intervention have been, are, and will continue to be present
for as long as society needs rules by which to live.
Today's governmental intervention, or decree, is tomorrow's opportunity.
For example, governments often act in the same way that cartels act.
Easily, the most effective dominant and effective cartel has been OPEC, and even OPEC has been
unable to create an ideal world from the standpoint of pricing its product.
Free markets will always find their own means of price discovery.
Keith Campbell.
He who lives by the crystal ball will eat shattered glass.
Ray Dalio.
Whenever we get a period of poor performance, most investors conclude something must be fixed.
They ask if the markets have changed, but trend following presupposes change.
John W. Henry.
With a possible exception of things like box scores, race results, and stock market tabulations,
there is no such thing as objective journalism.
The phrase itself is a pompous contradiction in terms.
Hunter S. Thompson.
One of our basic philosophical tendencies is that change is constant, change is random,
and trends will reappear if we go through a period of non-trending markets.
It's only a precursor to future trends, and we feel if there is an extended period of
non-trending markets, this really does set up a base for very dynamic trends in the
future.
Research at John W. Henry.
Our ace in the whole is that the governments usually screw things up and don't maintain
their sound money and policy coordination.
And about the time we're ready to give up on what usually has worked, and proclaim
that the world has now changed, the governments help us out by creating unwise policy that
helps produce dislocations and trends.
Jerry Parker.
Ultimately, it is the dollar-weighted collective opinion of all market participants that determines
whether a stock goes up or down.
This consensus is revealed by analyzing price.
Mark Abraham.
Now walking into client meetings, we hardly ever have a discussion around why trend following
works.
The battle has been won.
Anthony Todd.
It is not the strongest of the species that survive, nor the most intelligent.
But the ones most responsive to change.
Charles Darwin.
Investing should be more like watching paint dry or watching grass grow.
If you want excitement, take $800 and go to Las Vegas.
Paul Samuelson.
The trend is your friend except at the end when it bans.
Ed Zucota.
Defining a trend is like defining love.
We know it when we see it, but we are rarely sure exactly what it is.
Fung and Shea's paper goes a long way to doing for trends what poets have been trying
to do for love since time immemorial.
They give us a working model that quantitatively defines their value for us.
Traders will not be surprised to learn that trend following advisers performed best during
extreme market moves, especially during bad months for equities.
Change is not merely necessary to life.
It is life.
Alvin Toffler.
The people who excel in any field are people who realize that the moment is there to be
seized, that there are opportunities at every turn.
They are more alive to the moment.
Charles Faulkner.
The four most expensive words in the English language are, This time it's different.
Sir John Templeton.
They are like surfboard riders who study the movements of the waves, not in order
to understand why they behave as they do, but simply in order to be on hand whenever
they surge, to catch them at their crest, or as soon thereafter as possible, to ride
them as far as they possibly can, and to dissemble before they change direction.
Morton S. Borrets.
Markets don't move from one state to another in a straight line.
There are periods of counter-trend shock and volatility.
We spend most of our time trying to find ways to deal with those unsettling but
inevitable events.
That being said, it is really not difficult to put together a simple trend following system
that can generate positive returns over a realistic holding period, and there are many,
many commercial systems that have been generating strong, albeit volatile, returns for
a long time.
So there are definitely firm grounds for believing in Santa Claus.
Paul Mulvaney.
By honest I don't mean that you only tell what's true.
But you make clear the entire situation.
You make clear all the information that is required for someone else who is intelligent
to make up their mind.
Richard Feynman.
Warren Buffett says, in the long run, the stock market is a weighing machine, and in
the short term, it is a voting mechanism.
He exploits the weighing machine, and we exploit the voting mechanism.
David Harding.
Ed Zaccota is a genius and a great trader who has been phenomenally successful.
When I first met Ed, he had recently graduated from MIT and had developed some of the first
computer programs for testing and trading technical systems.
Ed provided an excellent role model.
For example, one time he was short silver, and the market just kept
eking down, a half penny a day.
Everyone else seemed to be bullish, talking about why silver had to go up because it was
so cheap.
But Ed stayed short.
Ed said, The trend is down, and I'm going to stay short until the
trend changes.
I learned patience from him in the way he followed the trend.
Michael Marcus.
Be less curious about people and more curious about ideas.
Marie Curie.
The wisest trend follower I know has said that every five years some famous trader blows
up and everyone declares trend following to be dead.
Then five years later some famous trader blows up and everyone declares
trend following to be dead.
Then, five years later, was the problem trend following or the trader?
Anonymous.
Trend following is similar to being long options because the stop
loss creates a limited downside and the continuation of the trend creates the large upside.
This is why the phrase for this approach to trading is to cut
losses and to let profits run.
Of course, if trends continually fail to materialize, these limited
losses can accumulate to large losses.
This is true for any option purchase strategy.
For trend followers, the option premium is paid for after an unsuccessful trade is
closed when a stop loss has been reached.
The premium can also be paid after markets have moved a great deal,
profits have been made, and a reversal causes a trailing stop to be hit,
and some of the profits reversed.
President.
Graham Capital Management.
In Patton, my favorite scene is when U.S. General George S. Patton has just
spent weeks studying the writing of his German adversary Field Marshal Erwin
Rommel and is crushing him in an epic tank battle in Tunisia.
Patton, sensing victory as he peers onto the battlefield from his command post
growls,
Rommel, you magnificent bastard, I read your book.
Paul Tudor Jones in George Soros, The Alchemy of Finance.
Bull market babies don't survive, they revert to the mean.
Michael Covell.
I began to realize that the big money must necessarily be in the big swing.
Jesse Livermore.
Many people would sooner die than think.
In fact, they do so.
Bertrand Russell.
Among people who take the trouble to understand what the business is about instead of assuming
it involves speculating on live cattle, it is readily understood.
Campbell & Company.
If you take a motion, would be, could be, should be, out of it and look at what is
and quantify it, I think you have a big advantage over most human beings.
M.W.
Henry.
A trend is a trend is a trend.
Gertrude Stein would have said if she were a trader,
Once you have a game plan, the differences are pretty idiosyncratic.
Richard Dennis.


# Chapter 6

Chapter 2. Great Trend Followers. Most of us don't have the discipline to stay focused
on a single goal for five, ten, or twenty years, giving up everything to bring it off.
But that's what's necessary to become an Olympic champion, a world-class surgeon,
or a Kirov ballerina. Even then, of course, it may be all in vain. You may make a single
mistake that wipes out all the work. It may ruin the sweet, lovable self you were
at seventeen. That old adage is true. You can do anything in life. You just can't do
everything. That's what Bacon meant when he said a wife and children were
hostages to fortune. If you put them first, you probably won't run the
three-and-a-half-minute mile, make your first ten million dollars, write the
great American novel, or go around the world on a motorcycle. Such goals take
complete dedication. Jim Rogers. The wise and most efficient way to
understand trend following is not by only learning rules that make up the
strategy, or by studying behavioral work, but by reviewing every last detail of the
traders who practice it. Anthony Robbins Modeling 101. However, many are
reluctant to concede they might do better with mentoring or guidance, even
if only from a book. Although they will sign up for a cooking or language
class and bet their money on social media avatars, they won't take advantage
of insights from those who have made fortunes. They prefer reinventing the
wheel instead of modeling behavior from proven top performers. However, the
evidence shows modeling is critical for trend following success. Ultimately,
I've come to realize, through nearly twenty years of research, if you take
trend following performance data seriously, you make a choice. You can
accept the data as fact, make an honest assessment of yourself and your approach
to making money, and make a commitment to change. Or, you can pretend the
performance of trend following traders doesn't exist and stay on passive
indexing autopilot while waiting for the inevitable correction. Author Tom
Friedman sees the immense benefits in thinking wide. He knows the first step
to the contrarian philosophy is that of a generalist. The great strategies
of the past kept forests as well as the trees in view. They were
generalists, and they operated from an ecological perspective. They
understood the world as a web, in which adjustments made here are bound
to have effects over there, that everything is interconnected. Where,
though, might one find generalists today? The dominant trend within
universities and the think tanks is toward ever narrower specialization.
A higher premium is placed on functioning deeply within a single field
than broadly across several. And yet, without some awareness of the
whole, without some sense of how means converge to accomplish or to
frustrate ends, there can be no strategy. And without strategy, there
is only drift. The traders I've profiled in trend following see the
playing field as generalists. They see what is important and cut the
extraneous. Charles Faulkner notes you must also know you. Being able
to trade your system instead of your psychology means separating
yourself from your trading. This can begin with your language. I'm
in the trading business and I work as a trader are very different
from I'm a trader or I own a few stocks and bonds from a major
east coast speculator. The market wizards I've met seem to live by
William Blake's phrase, I must make my own system or be enslaved by
anothers. They have made their own systems, in their trading and in
their lives and in their language. They don't allow others to define
them or their terms. And they are sometimes considered abrupt,
difficult, I caught a classic, or full of themselves as a result.
And they know the greater truth. They are themselves, and they know
what works for them. David Harding is a trend-following trader
not originally profiled in my first edition. He has established
himself as a leader of a new generation of trend-followers, which
includes Lita Braga, Cliff Assness, Martin Luke, Anthony Todd,
Zvante Bergstrom, Gerard Van Vliet, Ewan Kirk, Mart Eslander,
the Bignyff Mazuski, Natasha Rif Grey, and Jean-Philippe Bouchot.
After Harding, I reintroduce all the legendary trend-following
pros. They provide timeless insights, motivation, and lessons for
all aspiring trend-following traders, from the brand-new with
zero experience to professionals with perhaps all the wrong
experience. There are fantastic lessons from the superstar names,
no doubt. But 100 years from now, those names will be different.
The names always change, but trend-following strategy endures.
David Harding David Harding has had rock-and-roll success
as a trend-following trader. Today, his trend-following fund
for clients exceeds $30 billion in assets, give or take a billion
or two, to the upside. He had a long stretch where his firm
made 20 percent a year, but has dropped some with his explosion
of assets under management. Born in London and reared in Oxfordshire,
Harding was always interested in investing, a result of his father's
influence, a horticulturalist who enjoyed betting on the markets.
His mother, by comparison, was a French teacher. As a young man,
he had a natural inclination for science and quickly found a way
to put the talent to use. Early in his career he took a job
at Sabre Fund Management, where he designed trading systems.
Soon thereafter he met Michael Adam and Martin Luke.
The trio went on to launch Adam, Harding & Luke, AHL, a trend-following
firm managing money for clients. In a few years the man-group
bought AHL out and built its trend-following firm and systems
into a monster with billions under management. Harding, while
wealthy from the sale, knew much of man-group success was
built around his trading systems, but he wanted more than
to rest on his buyout winnings, and over time built his new firm
Winton Capital into a juggernaut. All that success comes
with a certain philosophical underpinning. But before jumping
into his philosophy, consider his performance.
See Table 2.1 in the supplemental PDF. I have had the opportunity
to talk with Harding on multiple occasions. He always comes
across as down-to-earth, a hard worker, but also highly
competitive. He wants to win. Harding did not start out with his
silver spoon. He worked. To hear him describe it, he engaged in
the sort of deliberate practice that Anders Ericsson researched.
I worked for a company early on, and the people who ran that
took a very old-fashioned approach to trading. About ten
people and I spent the first half of every day drawing
about 400 charts by hand. It was very tedious. I did this for
about two years. The act of laboriously updating these charts
forces you to focus in much more minute detail on data than
you normally would, and over a period of time, I became
completely convinced the market was not efficient, contrary to
the theory at the time. I became convinced that markets
weren't efficient and absolutely trended. We trade
everything using trend-following systems, and it works.
By simulation, you come up with ideas and hypotheses, and you
test those. Over the years, what we've done, essentially, is
conduct experiments. But instead of using a microscope or a
telescope, the computer is our laboratory instrument. And
instead of looking at the stars, we're looking at data and
simulation languages. It's counterintuitive to think in terms
of statistics and probability. It takes discipline and training.
It tortures the machinery. People are much better, for
instance, at judging whether another person is cheating in a
human relationship. We're hugely social creatures. We're keen on
our intuition. But when our intuition is wrong, we'll still
be very resistant to being corrected.
What are traders' biggest failures about understanding risk?
There's a human desire to seek spurious certainty. We try to
come to a yes-no answer, one that's absolute. When the
right answer might be neither yes nor no, people see things in
black and white when often they need to be comfortable with
shades of gray. Shades of gray are tough medicine to swallow,
a tough philosophy to believe down in your core. No one wants
to think that hardcore when it comes to money. You might want
to imagine uniform precision as possible, but if the guys who
make the most money think like Harding, it's smart to try
and think that way, too. At the end of the day, perhaps the
best lessons I took from Harding came from his original
internally published book, The Winton Papers. His decision-making
philosophy should be absorbed before anyone ever puts a dollar
to work in the markets. The aggregate effect of shared mental
biases and imitation results in patterns of behavior, which,
while they are non-consistent with Mr. Spock-like rational
decision-making or with informational efficiency, are
demonstrably systematic. The market equivalent of these
behavioral patterns is trending, whereby prices tend to move
persistently in one direction or another in response to
information. The widespread adoption of investing fashions,
like indexation, introduces market mechanisms, which magnify
hurting behavior on a large scale. Although Harding's words
were written before the events of 2008, his insights explained
the crash that followed. To those who want to learn how to
trade, to those who don't want to affix blame for down
performance, Harding offers a way out. But he knows his
agnostic approach has critics. Most people believe it
doesn't work, or if it did it soon won't. We almost never
do anything based on our opinions. If we do, it's based
on opinions about mathematical phenomenon and statistical
distribution, not opinions about Fed policy. Summary food
for thought.
David Harding on EMT. Economists, academics, modelers, gurus and
geeks need to recognize that though a grand and beautifully
simple theory applying across financial markets may be
desirable, it is most likely impossible. Harding, the essence
of trend-following has been effective beyond my wildest dreams
and from me it has been more risky to diversify away from
it. Harding. As the years have unfolded and I have had
experience of the seemingly magical phenomenon of trends, my
prejudice in favor of this unloved and unheralded investment
approach has hardened. To a statistician, this is called a
Bayesian philosophy. Harding. Humans are prone to
unpredictable behavior, to overreaction or slumbering
inaction, to mania and panic.
Bill Dunn. Bill Dunn's firm made fifty percent in
two thousand two when the majority of investors were
losing big from the dot-com blowout. The firm made twenty
one percent in the one month of October 2008 when most of
Wall Street was melting down. And in 2017 the firm's track
record exceeds forty plus years. Dunn Capital Performance
Data is a clear, consistent and dramatic demonstration of
trend-following. Dunn was the original founder and
chairman of Dunn Capital Management Inc. By his
original design the firm has always traded for above
average returns. Dunn has no defined target for return
other than positive. There is nothing in their risk
management that precludes annual returns approaching one
hundred percent. There is no policy, for example, if a
Dunn portfolio was up fifty percent by mid-year that
they would rest and dial back for the rest of the
year. Further, since 1984 their track record shows ten
drawdowns in excess of twenty-five percent. Did you
know Warren Buffett has drawdowns too? But whatever the
level of volatility, this independent, self-disciplined
and long-term trend follower never deviates from the
core strategy. We have a risk budgeting scheme that
certainly was ahead of its time in 1974 and is still,
in our opinion, state of the art in 2017. It is easy
to believe that Dunn Capital adheres the core rules
set forth forty years ago if you understand sound
business principles. Essentially, whatever you find
will be as true ten years from now, twenty years
from now, thirty or fifty years from now as it is
today and as it was fifty years ago. And if you
can put your finger on those truths, then you've made
a contribution. Dunn Capital has always believed in
order to make money you must live with volatility.
Friends who invest must have absolute, no-questions-
asked trust in the firm's decision-making. This trend
follower has no patience for questions about their
ability to take and accept losses. This full-throttle
approach has proven itself for forty years, making
everyone involved, owners and clients, rich. The Dunn
risk budgeting scheme, or money management, is based
on objective decision-making. Caution is costly,
could be the motto. At a certain point, if they
enter a market and if the market goes down to a
point, they exit. To Dunn, trading without a
predefined exit strategy is a recipe for disaster.
Dunn Capital's risk management system enables
the firm to balance overall portfolio volatility,
something the average or even professional investor
ignores. The more volatile a market, the less
they trade. The less volatile a market, the more
they trade. For Dunn, if risk-taking is a necessary
means to potential profit, then position sizing
should always be titrated to maintain the targeted
risk constraint, which in turn should be set at
the maximum level acceptable. The Dunn system of
risk management ensures discipline. One of our
areas of expertise in the risk budgeting process
is how risk is going to be allocated to, say, a
yen trade and how much risk is going to be
allocated to an S&P trade and what is the
optimal balance of that for a full 22 market
portfolio. The risk parameters are really defined
by their buy and sell signals, so it is just a
matter of how much you are going to commit to
that trade so that if it goes against you,
you are going to lose only X percent.
Extreme performance numbers. Like Dunn Capital's
philosophy, this chart, figure 2.1 in the
supplemental PDF, assumes an in-your-face
attitude, and that is not negative. That
performance data compares returns if you had
hypothetically invested $1,000 with Dunn and
$1,000 with the S&P. It demands a choice.
Either put your money with Dunn, learn to trend
follow yourself, or pretend trend following does
not exist. Next, consider two charts that
reflect different periods of Dunn Capital's
trading history, but tell the same story about
their approach. The first one, figure 2.2 in the
supplemental PDF, is a Japanese yen trade from
December 1994 to June 1996, where Dunn made a
monumental killing. 1995 was obviously a great
year for Dunn Capital, and in 2003, Bill Dunn
walked through his trend following home run
with an audience that came away with an
invaluable lesson. This is 18 months of the
Japanese yen, and as you can see, it went up
and down, and there were some significant
trends, so we should have had an opportunity
to make some money, and it turns out we did.
Because the WMA is a reversal system, it's
always in the market. It's either long or
short, trying to follow and identify the major
trends. So, while this is the first signal
that's shown on the chart, and is long, we
obviously must have been short coming into this
big rise. The rise was enough to tell us we
should quit being short and start being long,
and it seemed like a pretty smart thing to
do, and after we saw that big rise up. Dunn
Capital is riding the trend up that first
big hill of the yen in March 1995. They're
making decisions within the context of their
mechanical system. Bill Dunn continues. Then we
have significant retracement, which caused a
short signal for the WMA program. Our model
has always incorporated near-term volatility,
and this volatility as we went long was far
less than the volatility that was going on
when we went short. Bill Dunn summarizes the
trade. Now also, because the volatility was
very high here, this rise was not enough
to give us a long signal, and as a result,
we rode this short position for nearly a year
all the way down, where we got a long
signal that was wrong, and we reversed and
went down to short. Now that was a very, very
good market for our program, but some markets
are not so good. The confidence in Bill Dunn's
tone and delivery cannot be replicated in print.
I feel fortunate to have the original tape.
B. Nimble. Bill Dunn, with a straight face
after riding a trend to great profit, once
noted, the recent volatility in the energy
complex has been quite exciting and potentially
rewarding for the nimble. What does Dunn mean
by nimble? They mean they are ready to make
decisions based on market movement. When an
opportunity to get on a potential trend
appears, they are prepared. They take the
leap. They are nimble when relying on their
system. They react to the Japanese yen move
with precise rules because they trust their
trading plan and risk management. The second
chart is the British pound, figure 2.3 in the
supplemental PDF, where, unlike the Japanese
yen, the market proved unfavorable for Dunn
capital. It was a whipsaw market, which is
always difficult for trend followers. You can
see how they entered and were stopped out,
then entered and were stopped out again.
Remember, trend following doesn't predict market
direction or duration, it reacts. So small
losses are always part of the game. Dunn managed
the small losses because the British pound
was only a portion of their portfolio. Their
yen trade more than made up for losses on
the British pound trade because, no matter
how uncomfortable others are with that approach,
for Dunn, big winners offset small losers in
the long run. If you told Bill Dunn his
approach made you uncomfortable, he would
be blunt. We don't make market predictions,
we just ride the bucking bronco. Dunn's failed
British pound trades demonstrate exactly what
he means when he says, we just ride the bucking
bronco. In hindsight, you might ask yourself,
why was Dunn capital trading the British pound
if they were losing? The simple answer is they,
nor anyone else, could have predicted whether
or not the British pound would be the next
great home run. The real question is, do you
stay out of the game because you can't predict
how the game is going to unfold? Early years.
Bill Dunn grew up in Kansas City and Southern
California. After graduating from high school,
he served three years with the U.S. Marine Corps.
In the ensuing years, he received a bachelor
degree in engineering physics from the University
of Kansas in 1960 and a doctorate in theoretical
physics from Northwestern University. For the next
two years he held research and faculty
positions at the University of California and
Pomona College. He then worked for organizations
near Washington, D.C., developing and testing
logistical and operational systems for the
Department of Defense. He enjoyed the R&D side
of things, but wanted to go beyond theoretical.
The markets became his real world. Around the
age of 35, Dunn got it. He was working out of
his home in suburban Fairfax, Virginia, when he
came across a newsletter touting a commodity
trading system, which almost sounded too good
to be true. Upon testing, it turned out to be
the case and he set about developing his new
system. Using daily data, Dunn's original system
looked for big trends as defined by a percentage
of a price move from a recent low or high. It
traded each market three to five times a year,
automatically reversing if the trend moved in
the other direction. Dunn determined position
size by risking 2% to 6% of equity under management
on each trade. It's not uncommon for long-term
trend followers to have trades in place for well
over a year, hence the term long. If you want
day trading insanity or the feeling of exhilaration
in Las Vegas, Dunn Capital is not the firm you
should choose as the trading role model. Following
their computerized trading system, Dunn holds
long-term positions and major trends, typically
trading only two to five times per year in each
market. Their original system was a reversal
system, whereby it is always in the market
either long or short. Dunn notes proudly they
have held winning positions for as long as a
year and a half. Early on, Bill Dunn needed more
capital to execute his particular plan of
attack on trading. He found it in the person
of Ralph Kloppenstein. Ralph helped launch Dunn
by giving him a $200,000 house account to manage.
Dunn, still a Defense Department systems analyst,
realized his trading hobby would require a whole
lot of other people's money to properly use
his promising system. That's a great lesson.
When you stop trying to please others and
concentrate on pleasing yourself, you become
aware of what you are passionate about in life.
And when that happens, all sorts of supporters
come out of the woodwork to help you achieve
your goals. Bill Dunn is serendipity-proof
positive. Life Inside Dunn Capital
Years back, Marty Bergen, podcast episode 525,
arranged for me to visit Stewart, Florida,
and spend a day at Dunn Capital. In one of
those classic small-world stories, Bergen had
been my baseball coach when I was 16 in northern
Virginia outside Washington, D.C. Today he is
the president and owner of Dunn Capital, while
Bill Dunn remains chairman emeritus.
Amazingly, their long-time office is on a quiet
street located off a waterway in the heart
of Stewart, a quiet retirement community 30
miles from West Palm Beach. There is no grand
entrance at Dunn Capital, so after you enter,
your only recourse is to see if anyone is in.
It feels more like an accountant's office than
a high-powered trading firm. In fact, the
atmosphere is no atmosphere. Dunn is a shining
example of why location, pretentious offices,
and intense activity have little to do with
long-term trading success. There are not
hundreds of employees at Dunn Capital because
it doesn't take armies to run the fund. Plus,
not all employees are traders. One issue to
deal with when running a fund is not necessarily
trading, but accounting and regulatory concerns.
No one at Dunn is tied to screens,
discretionary trading. Trades are systematically
entered only after an alarm goes off,
indicating a buy or sell signal. Another reason
Dunn Capital has less infrastructure is because
they have a few relatively well-chosen clients.
In fact, Bill Dunn was fond of saying,
if people want to invest with me, they know
where to find me. Dunn's investors benefit
from the fact there is no disconnect between
their bottom line as a fund manager and the
investor's bottom line. To wit, trading profits.
Dunn Capital is different than many because
they compound absolute returns. They leave
their own money on the table by reinvesting
in the fund. As a result, Dunn's assets are
not only made up of clients, but owners and
employees too, all systematically reinvesting
profits over a very long time. By focusing
on profits and incentive fees, Dunn Capital
makes money only when the fund, read, clients,
makes money. They don't charge a management fee.
With no management fee, there is no incentive
to constantly raise capital. The only incentive
is to make money. If Dunn makes money,
the firm gets a portion of the profits.
Compounding or reinvesting your profits
makes sense if you're serious about making
money, and Dunn is serious. In the time
I spent with Bill Dunn, Marty Bergen, and
other staff, I was impressed with their
matter-of-fact, no-B-S attitude. In fact,
the very first time I met Bill Dunn, he was
wearing khakis and a Hawaiian shirt, and
made it clear while he looked out over the
waterways of Florida, it was his reasoned way
or the highway. No Profit Targets. Dunn
Capital doesn't say, we want fifteen percent
a year. The market can't be ordered to give
a trader a steady fifteen percent rate of
return, but even if it could, is a steady
fifteen percent the right way in the first
place? If you started with a thousand dollars,
what rate of return would you rather have
over a period of three years? Plus fifteen
percent, plus fifteen percent, and plus fifteen
percent? Or the unpredictable negative five
percent, plus fifty percent, and plus twenty
percent? At the end of three years, the
first hypothetical investment opportunity
would be worth $1,520, but the second
investment would be worth $1,710. The
second one would be a stream of returns
representative of a Dunn-type trading style.
You can't dial in a return for a given year.
There are no Profit Targets that work, Bill
Dunn explained. We only have two systems.
The first system is the one I started with
in 1974. The other system we developed and
launched in 1989. The major strategic elements
of these two models, how and when to trade,
how much to buy and sell, have never changed
in almost thirty years. We expect change.
None of the things that have happened in
the development of new markets over the
past thirty years strike us as making the
marketplace different in any essential way.
The markets are just the markets. I know
that is unusual. I know in the past five
years a lot of competitors have
purposefully lowered the risk on their
models, i.e. they are deleveraging them or
trying to mix them with other things to
reduce the volatility. Of course, they
have also reduced their returns. He is
addressing a critical issue, reducing
risk to reduce volatility for nervous
clients. The result is always lower
absolute returns. If you remain fixated
on volatility as an enemy, instead of
seeing volatility as the source of
profit, you will never get this. Dunn
Capital by definition is very good at
using risk management, more commonly
called money management, or as Van Tharp
calls it, position sizing, to their
advantage. In June 2002, Dunn returned 24.26%,
then followed that with 14.84% for July.
By that time, he was up 37% for the
same year in which buy-in holders of the
NASDAQ for this period were crushed. Dunn
Capital finished 2002 up more than 50%.
Their 2008 performance was huge again, a
big up year when most of the world was
collapsing. How does Dunn do it? Cuts
losses. Never changes core strategy. Dunn
Capital's performance is not a result of
human judgment. Their trend following is
quantitative and systematic with no
discretionary overrides of system
generated trade signals. This is foreign
to those who watch CNBC for stock tips.
Dunn's trading style doesn't drift. Long
term holding. For holding periods of
approximately 3.75 years and beyond, all
returns are positive for Dunn Capital.
Lesson? Stay with the system for the
long haul and do well. Compounding. Dunn
Capital compounds relentlessly. The firm
plows profits back into their trading
system and builds upon fresh gains.
Recovery. Dunn Capital had losing years
of 27.1% in 1976 and 32% in 1981,
followed by multi-year gains of 500%
and 300% respectively. You must be able
to accept draw downs and understand that
recovery is around the corner. Going
short. Dunn Capital goes short as often
as he goes long. Buy and holders
generally never consider the short side.
If you are not biased to trend direction,
you can win either way. Dunn Capital has
had its share of draw downs, but their
approach remains clear and calm. Some
experience losses and then wait for
gains which they hope will come soon.
But sometimes they don't come soon and
sometimes they don't come at all and
the traders perish. Nevertheless, don't
think for a second you are not going to
suffer draw downs either by trading like
Dunn Capital or letting them manage your
money. And draw downs, aka your account
going down, will make you feel like you
need an extra dose of Prilosec. There
are great lessons to be learned from
Dunn Capital's performance data, but I
found insight in their writings as well.
One. As global monetary, fiscal, and
political conditions grow
increasingly unsustainable, the trend
following strategy that Dunn Capital
steadfastly employs may possibly be one
of the few beneficiaries. Two. The only
thing that can be said with certainty
about the current state of the world
economy is that there are many large
unsustainable imbalances and structural
problems that must be corrected. Perhaps
the equity markets are correctly
predicting a rapid return to more
stable and prosperous times. Perhaps not.
Regardless, there seems to be more
than ample fodder for the creation of
substantial trends in the coming months.
Three. On the truly bright side, it is
comforting to know that the opinions
expressed in this letter will have
absolutely no bearing on the time-
tested methods that Dunn Capital uses to
generate trading profits and manage
risk. I love that even though Bill Dunn,
Marty Bergen, and the firm have strong
political opinions, they know opinions
mean zilch when it comes to proper
trading. Their political and economic
opinions do not form the basis of when
to buy and sell. These problems prevent
clients from seeing Dunn Capital's
perspective. Clients usually do not
understand trend followings nature. They
often panic and pull out just before the
big move makes a lot of money. Clients
may start asking for the trader to
change their approach. Although they may
not have articulated this directly to
the fund manager, they really wanted
the trend following strategy customized
for them before investing their money in
the first place. The manager is then
faced with a difficult decision. Take the
client's money and make money through
management fees, which can be lucrative,
or trade the capital as originally
designed. Trading a trend following
system as originally designed is the
optimal path in the long run. There must
be a match between trader and client
as Bill Dunn noted. A person must be an
optimist to be in this business, but I
also believe it's a cyclical phenomenon
for several other reasons. In our 18
years, 40 plus now, of experience, we've
had to endure a number of long and nasty
periods, during which we've asked
ourselves this same question. In late
1981, our accounts had lost about 42
percent over the previous 12 months,
and we and our clients were starting to
wonder if we would ever see good
markets again. We continued to trade our
thoroughly researched system, but our
biggest client got cold feet and
withdrew about 70 percent of our total
equity under management. You guessed it.
Our next month was up 18 percent, and
in the 36 months following, their
withdrawal of our accounts made 430
percent. Check your ego. Dunn Capital once
posted a want ad that caught my eye.
Part of it read, candidates must not be
constrained by any active non-compete
agreement and will be required to enter
into a confidentiality and non-compete
agreement. Only long-term team players
need apply, no prima donnas. Salary,
competitive base salary, commensurate
with experience, with bonus potential
and attractive benefits, beginning at
$65,000. Notice that Dunn Capital says,
no prima donnas. Readers of this ad can
choose either to work for Dunn or attempt
to be Dunn on their own, but they cannot
have both. Trend following demands taking
personal responsibility for one's actions,
and Dunn Capital makes it clear they are
responsible. An interesting trait seen in
many trend followers is their honesty.
If you listen closely to their words and
review their performance, they tell you
exactly what they are doing and why.
Dunn Capital is a great example in
action. Summary food for thought.
Dunn Capital's performance data is one of
the clearest, most consistent and dramatic
demonstrations of trend following
success available. Originally, Dunn
Capital's design risk was a 1% chance
of a 20% or greater loss in a given
month. In January 2013, Dunn
implemented an adaptive risk profile.
Dunn's VAR target is no longer
static. Now the firm targets a dynamic
monthly VAR between 8 to 22% based on
market conditions. Dunn recalibrates its
portfolio daily to gear the risk to what
it measures as the favorability of
markets to trend following. The average
monthly VAR going forward should be
about 15%, which translates into an
annualized volatility of about 23%
over time. John W. Henry. Since my first
edition, John W. Henry has retired to his
hobbies as the owner of the Boston Red
Sox and the Liverpool Football Club.
His current net worth of $2.2 billion
started with trading, because let's face
it, owning those teams required capital.
Guess where he got the money to buy?
Trend following. And given the timelessness
of his wisdom, investors will improve
their financial condition by
considering John W. Henry's trading
career. Interestingly, the early
performance data of Dunn Capital and
John W. Henry shows them to be trend
followers cut from similar cloth, high
octane. They are both astonishingly
successful, self-made men who started
without formal association to Wall Street.
They developed trading systems in the
1970s that made them millions of
dollars. Their correlated performance
data showed they both traded for
absolute returns and often traded in
the same trends at the same time.
Henry captured some of the great
trends of his generation. By all
available evidence, Henry was on the
other side of the Bearings Bank
blowout in 1995. In the zero-sum game,
he won what Bearings Bank lost. In
2002, Henry was up 40% while the
Nasdaq was spiraling downwards. He,
like Dunn, didn't have a strategy
that could be remotely considered
active or day-trading. But when his
trading system told him, it's time,
he literally blew the doors off the
barn with spectacular returns in
short order. Did he have down
years? Yes, from time to time,
but he was right there again making
huge money in 2008 when everyone
else was losing. Also, as the
owner of the Boston Red Sox,
Henry applies the basic tenets of
trend following, simple heuristics
for decision-making, mathematics,
statistics, and application of a
system to the world of sports.
Prediction is futile. Henry was
always blunt about prediction
fantasies. I don't believe that I
am the only person who cannot
predict future prices. No one can
consistently predict anything,
especially investors. Prices, not
investors, predict the future.
Despite this, investors hope or
believe that they can predict the
future or someone else can. A lot
of them look to you to predict what
the next macroeconomic cycle will
be. We rely on the fact that other
investors are convinced that they
can predict the future and I
believe that's where our profits
come from. I believe it's that
simple. Because trend following is
primarily based on a single piece
of data, the price, it is
difficult to paint the true
story of what that means. Henry
was always able to articulate
clearly and consistently how he
traded year after year to those
willing to listen carefully. To
generate his profits, he relied
on the fact other traders thought
they could predict where the
market will go and often ended
up as losers. Henry would tell
you that he routinely won the
losses of the market losers in
the zero-sum trading game.
On the Farm John W. Henry was
born in Quincy, Illinois to a
successful farming family. For a
Midwestern farm boy in the 1950s,
there was nothing in the world
like baseball and from the time
nine-year-old Henry went to his
first Major League game, he was
hooked. In the summer he would
listen to the great St. Louis
Cardinals broadcaster Harry
Carey night after night. Henry
described himself as having
average intelligence but a knack
for numbers and like many young
baseball fans, he crunched
batting averages in his head.
Henry attended community
colleges and took numerous
night courses but never received
his college degree. It wasn't
for lack of interest, however.
When he was attending a class
taught by Harvey Brody at
UCLA, they collaborated on and
published a strategy for beating
blackjack odds. When his
father died, Henry took over the
family farms, teaching himself
hedging techniques on the side.
He began speculating in corn,
wheat and soybeans, and it
wasn't long before he was
trading for clients. In 1981, he
founded John W. Henry and
Company, Inc. in Newport Beach,
California. Henry's first
managed account was staked with
$16,000 and he now owns the
Boston Red Sox. Don't you think
the best question to ask is,
how? A former president at his
trading firm speaks to their
success. There has been
surprisingly little change.
Models we developed 20 years
ago are still in place today.
Obviously, we trade a different
mix of markets. We've also
added new programs over the
last 20 years, but relative to
many of our peers, we have not
made significant adjustments in
our trading models. We believe
that markets are always
changing and adjusting, and
the information that's important
to investors will also
change. In the 1980s, everyone
was interested in the money
supply figures. Everyone would
wait by their phones until that
number came out. In the 1990s,
the information du jour was
unemployment numbers. But
people's reactions to the
markets are fairly stable.
Uncertainty creates trends and
that's what we're trying to
exploit. Even if you have
better and faster
dissemination of information,
the one thing we haven't
really improved is people's
ability to process information.
We're trying to exploit
people's reaction, which is
embedded in prices and leads
to trends. These reactions are
fairly stable and may not
require major adjustments of
models. He reiterates an
important philosophical tenet of
trend following. In looking at
the long term, change is
constant. And because change is
constant, uncertainty is
constant. And from
uncertainty, trends emerge. It
is the exploitation of these
trends that forms the basis of
trend following profit. All your
cutting edge technology or
news reading is not going to
help you trade trends. When I
spoke with Henry's president,
he sounded like classic
traders from 100 years
earlier. We stick to our
knitting. Most people don't
have the discipline to do
what they need to do. We like
to keep it sophisticatedly
simple. Our best trading days
are when we don't trade. We
make more money the less we
trade. Some of our best
trades are when we are
sitting on our hands doing
nothing. We don't want to be
the smartest person in the
market. Trying to be the
smart person in the market is
a losing game. He was not
being flippant. His tone was
matter of fact. He wanted
people to understand why his
firm succeeded. A few years
ago he gave a great analogy
about the emotional ups and
downs. Looking at the year as
a mountain ride, anyone who
has ridden the trains in
mountainous Switzerland will
remember the feeling of
anxiety and expectations as
you ascend and descend the
rugged terrain. During the
decline there is anxiety
because you often do not
know how far you will fall.
Expectations are heightened
as you rise out of the
valley because you cannot
always see the top of the
mountain. Worldview
Philosophy. Trend
followers like Henry could
not have developed his
trading systems without
first deciding how he was
going to view the world.
Through experience,
education, and research, he
came to an understanding of
how markets work before he
determined how to trade
them. What he found was
market trends are more
pervasive than people think,
and trends could have been
traded in the same way 200
years ago as they are today.
Henry spent years studying
historical price data from
the 18th and 19th centuries
in order to prove his
research. When he explained
his philosophy, he was
crystal clear about what it
was and what it was not.
Long-term trend
identification. Trading
systems ignore short-term
volatility in the attempt
to capture superior returns
during major trending
markets. Trends can last as
long as a few months or
years. Highly disciplined
investment process.
Methodology is designed to
keep discretionary
decision-making to a
minimum. Risk management.
Traders adhere to a strict
formulaic risk management
system that includes market
exposure weightings, stop
loss provisions, and
capital commitment guidelines
that attempt to preserve
capital during trendless or
volatile periods. Global
diversification. By
participating in more than
70 markets and not focusing
on one country or region,
they have access to
opportunities that less
diversified firms may
miss. The uninformed
dismiss trend following as
predictive technical
analysis. Henry was not a
predictive indicator guru.
Some people call would we do
technical analysis, but we
just identify and follow
trends. It's like if you
are in the fashion world,
you have to follow trends
or your yesterday's news.
But as with technical
analysis, trend followers
believe that markets are
smarter than any of their
individual participants.
In fact, they make it
their business not to try
to figure out why markets
are going up or down or
where they're going to
stop. Henry's use of
fashion as a metaphor goes
beyond obvious comparison
between trends in
clothing and in markets.
To be fashionable, you
have no choice but to
follow trends. Likewise,
trend followers have no
choice but to react and
follow trends. And like
those who follow fashion
early, successful trend
followers exploit trends
long before the public is
clued in. Trend
followers would agree with
H. L. Mencken when he
said, we are here and
it is now. Further than
that, all human
knowledge is moonshine.
They understand attending
to what is taking place
in the market from
moment to moment isn't
a technique. It is what
is and that is all. The
moment, the here and
now is the only place
that is truly measurable.
Henry illustrated the
point in a coffee trade.
All fundamentals were
bearish. The International
Coffee Organization was
unable to agree on a
package to support
prices. There was an
oversupply of coffee and
the free season was over
in Brazil. His system
signaled an unusually
large long position in
coffee. He bought, placing
2% of the portfolio on
the trade. The system
was right. Coffee
rallied to $2.75 per
pound from $1.32 in the
last quarter of the
year and he made a
70% return. The best
trades are the ones I
dislike the most. The
market knows more than
I do. What you think
you know gets you in
trouble. Henry knew the
complicated, difficult
elements of trend
following were not about
what you must master,
but what you must
eliminate from your
market view. On why
long-term approaches
work best, there is an
overwhelming desire to
act in the face of
adverse market moves.
Usually it is termed
avoiding volatility with
the assumption that
volatility is bad.
However, I found
avoiding volatility really
inhibits the ability to
stay with a long-term
trend. The desire to
have close stops to
preserve open trade
equity has tremendous
costs over decades.
Long-term systems do
not avoid volatility.
They patiently sit
through it. This
reduces the occurrence of
being forced out of a
position that is in the
middle of a long-term
major move.
ON STOCKS
The current thinking is
that stocks have
outperformed everything
else for 200 years.
They may have a little
relevance for the next
25 years. But there is
no one in the year
2000 that you can
convince to jettison
the belief that 200
years of performance will
not cause stocks to
grow to the sky. Right
now people believe in
data that supports the
inevitable growth in
prices of stocks within
a new landscape or new
economy. What will be
new to them is an
inevitable bear market.
For all his talk about
avoiding predictions,
Henry is making one
here. He is predicting
stocks can't go up
forever because
eventually trends
reverse themselves. He
is also pointing out
that as a trend
follower, he was
prepared to take action
and profit, which he
did during the market
crash of October
2008.
STARTING WITH
RESEARCH
Henry has influenced
many traders. One of
his former associates
presented these
observations in his new
firm's marketing
materials. The time
frame of the trading
system is long-term in
nature, with a majority
of profitable trades
lasting longer than
six weeks and some
lasting for several
months. The system is
neutral in markets until
a signal to take a
position is generated.
It is not uncommon for
markets to stay neutral
for months at a time,
waiting for prices to
reach a level that
warrants a long or short
position. The system
incorporates predefined
levels of initial trade
risk. If a new trade
turns quickly
unprofitable, the risk
control parameters in
place for every trade
will force a liquidation
when the preset stop
loss level is
reached. In such
situations, a trade can
last for as little as
one day. This same
employee participated in
a conference seminar
while at Henry's
firm. The conference
was sparsely attended
and, as happens when
someone speaks to a
small audience, the
conversation became
more informal and more
revealing. We are very
well aware of the trends
that have taken place
in the last twenty
years, and we are just
curious to see are we
in a period in this
century that trend
following seems to
work? Have we lucked
out that we happened
to be in this industry
during trends for the
last decade or two? We
went back to the 1800s
and looked at interest
rates, currency
fluctuations, and grain
prices to see if there
was as much volatility in
an era that most people
don't know much about as
there has been this
decade. Much to our
relief and maybe also
surprise, we found out
that there were just as
many trends, currencies,
interest rates, and
grain prices back in the
1800s as there has been
exhibited this last
decade. Once again, we
saw the trends were
relatively random,
unpredictable, and just
further supported our
philosophy of being
fully diversified and
don't alter your system
to work in any specific
time period." He
added. Hours and hours
were spent in the depths
of the University
Library archives. They
gave us Xerox burns on
our hands, I think,
photocopying grain
prices and interest
rate data, not only in
the U.S. but also
around the world. We
looked at overseas
interest rates back to
that time period. A
lot of it is a little
bit sketchy, but it was
enough to give us the
fact that things really
jumped around back then
as they do now. It
reminded me of the
scene in The Wizard of
Oz when Toto pulls back
the curtain to reveal how
the wizard works his
magic. It was clear
there were no secret
formulas or hidden
strategies. There were no
shortcuts. This was
slow, painstaking trench
warfare in the bowels of
a research library armed
only with a photocopier
to memorialize price
histories. Years later,
I was inspired to do my
own price research. My
objective in the moment
was not to use price
data in a trading system,
but to see how little
markets had changed. One
of the best places to
research historical
market data in
newspapers and
magazines from over 100
years ago is the U.S.
National Agricultural
Library. Don't be
misled by the word
agricultural. You can
review the stacks at
this library and spend
hours poring over
magazines from the
1800s. Like Henry's
firm, I discovered
through weeks of research
that markets were indeed
the same then as now. On
the record, I had the
chance to hear Henry
speak in person at an
FIA Research Division
dinner in New York City
years back. This was
only months after the
Barring's Bank
debacle. During the
Q&A, Henry revealed the
qualities shared by all
successful trend
followers. He refused to
waste time discussing
fundamentals and offered
a genuine appreciation of
the nature of change.
Moderator
The question that always
comes up for technicians
is, do you believe the
markets have changed?
Henry, it always comes
up whenever there are
losses, especially
prolonged losses. I
heard it, in fact, when
I started my career 14
years ago. They were
worrying, is there too
much money going into
trend following? You
laugh, but I can show
you evidence in writing
of this. My feeling is
that markets are always
changing. But if you
have a basic philosophy
that's sound, you're
going to be able to take
advantage of those
changes to greater or
lesser degrees. It is the
same with using good,
sound business
principles. The changing
world is not going to
materially hurt you if
your principles are
designed to adapt. So
the markets have
changed, but that's to
be expected and it's
good.
Female Voice
John, you're noted
for your discipline. How
did you create that and
how do you maintain
that? Henry, well, you
create discipline by
having a strategy you
really believe in. If
you really believe in your
strategy, that brings
about discipline. If you
don't believe in it, in
other words, if you
haven't done your homework
properly and haven't
made assumptions that you
can really live with when
you're faced with
difficult periods, then
it won't work. It
really doesn't take
much discipline if you
have a tremendous
confidence in what
you're doing.
Male Voice
I'd like to know if your
systems are completely
black box.
Henry, we don't use any
black boxes. I know
people refer to technical
trend following as
black box, but what
you have is really a
certain philosophy of
trading. Our philosophy
is that there is an
inherent return in trend
following. I know CTAs
that have been around
a lot longer than I
have who have been
following trends. Bill
Don, Milburn, and others
who have done rather
well over the last 20
to 30 years. I don't
think it's luck year
after year after year.
Lita Braga, the most
successful female trend
follower today, builds on
Henry's earlier message
with comparable
timelessness. We're
actually a white box,
the white of the mind. We
are fully auditable. If
you are a pension fund
with long-term
liabilities, you want
some reassurance that
the business is
sustainable. The hedge fund
business is filled with
very talented people, but
talented people retire.
What we do, this effort
to articulate the
investment process
through algorithms,
through equations,
through code, means that
the intellectual property
exists in its own right.
If I disappear tomorrow,
it's fine.
As a side note, what
that John W. Henry
transcript cannot
recreate on the page
is the audience reaction.
I remember looking
around at the Henry fans
jammed into that
Wall Street hotel suite
and thinking, everyone
in this room is far
more interested in viewing
Henry as a personality,
a rock star, instead
of knowing what he does
to make money.
Change is overrated.
Henry was publicly
forthright for years.
For instance, his
presentation in Geneva,
Switzerland, could have
been a semester course
and trend following for
those open to the message.
We began trading our
first program in 1981,
and this was after
quite a bit of research
into the practical aspects
of a basic philosophy
of what drives markets.
The world was
frighteningly different
in those days
than it is today
when I was designing
what turned out to be
a trend following system.
That approach,
a mechanical and
mathematical system,
has not really changed
at all.
Yet the system continues
to be successful today,
even though there has
been virtually no change
to it over the last 18 years.
I can't help but notice
the, we haven't changed
our system, chorus,
is not only sung by Don,
but by Henry
and many other trend followers.
Consider an example
of a winning trend for Henry,
see Figure 2.4
in the supplemental PDF.
We took a position
around March or April,
1998, in the South African
rand, short, which would
be this particular chart.
This is the dollar going up
against the rand.
You can see it takes time
for these things,
and if you're patient,
you can have huge profits,
especially if you don't set
a profit objective.
Moreover, Henry did well
in the historical
Japanese yen trade shown
in Figure 2.5
in the supplemental PDF.
Henry concluded,
you can see that
in this enormous move,
when the dollar yen went
from 100 to 80
in that particular month,
we were up 11%
just in the Japanese yen
that quarter.
Fade the Fed.
Overreaction to Federal
Reserve announcements
is part of Wall Street life.
Some so-called pros
take the Federal Reserve's
words and act on them,
even if there is no way
to know what any of it means.
And does it make logical sense
to worry about what the Fed
is going to do
if there is no way
to decipher it?
The Fed, to the best
of my knowledge,
has never offered
any statement you could rely
on that says,
buy 10,000 shares of GOOG now
and sell here.
Henry's trend-following system
was never predicated
on the Fed statements.
I know that when the Fed
first raises interest rates
after months of lowering them,
you do not see them
the next day
lowering interest rates.
And they don't raise rates
and then a few days later
or a few weeks later
lower them.
They raise, raise, raise, raise.
Pause.
Raise, raise, raise.
And then once they lower,
they don't raise, lower,
raise, lower, raise, lower.
Rather, they lower, lower,
lower, lower.
There are trends that tend
to exist,
whether they are capital flows
or interest rates.
If you have enough discipline
or if you only trade
a few markets,
you don't need a computer
to trade this way.
Henry knows the human mind
creates anxiety
by conjuring up terrifying
future market scenarios.
He kept focused in the present
on what he could control,
his system.
That attitude for dealing
with the Fed never changes,
no matter who was playing
the game.
Trading retirement.
John W. Henry
shut his trend-following firm
down in 2012,
but most of his assets
under management
were pulled in 2007
before the financial crisis
in October 2008.
That meant billions
and Merrill Lynch assets
left Henry's firm
and went to other
trend-following firms,
for example,
firms in London.
And by the time 2008 unfolded,
his money under management
had decreased so much
that even his great
2008 performance
was not enough.
Many will tell you
John W. Henry
was simply too volatile
for modern tastes,
whatever modern means exactly.
And when taking a look
at his program's track records,
there are big numbers
on both sides.
Take his financials
and medals,
36% annualized volatility,
for example,
or the multiple years
with above 40% gains
or more than 17% losses,
and you can see that
Henry's model was one
of high risk for high return.
Not surprisingly,
his exit from trend-following
has left some confused.
This 2016 note in my inbox
illustrates,
I recently purchased
your trend-following book,
2009 edition,
and had been eagerly reading it
for the past several days.
After reading about
the success of John W. Henry,
I decided to look him up
and discovered he had to close
his firm a few years ago
after experiencing
unsustainable losses.
In your book,
you frequently discuss
how time and time again
critics argue
that trend-following is dead,
yet they are consistently
proven wrong.
My question is,
if trend-following
is such a reliable strategy,
how could one of the most
successful trend-followers
collapse?
In general,
I agree with all of the points
you make in your book,
but I worry that if someone
who is exceedingly versed
on the methods of trend-following
can lose huge sums of money,
then someone like me,
with absolutely no experience
using trend-following techniques,
is also bound to fail.
Great question.
An insider with Henry at the time
provided insights instructive
for the confused or skeptical.
It is a fallacy to say
John W. Henry collapsed.
His clients moved on
to other trend-following firms.
Firm assets went from
over $2 billion to $150 million
in about 1.5 years.
The firm did not close
because of unsustainable losses,
but more from a redeployment
of his talents
and investment capital.
Big funds are all about
distribution.
That means keeping brokers happy
as they live and die
with commissions.
Henry's peers weathered the storm.
Competition replaced older firms
who did not respond to vagaries
of the brokerage industry.
Trend-following assets
under management exploded
inside several London-based firms,
for example Winton, Aspect,
Cantab, etc.
Henry essentially moved
into venture capital.
Red Sox baseball was not a hobby,
it was a business transaction.
He also bought Fenway Park,
the Broadcasting,
the Boston Globe,
the Liverpool Football Club, UK.
People don't think of Henry
as a venture capitalist,
but he became one.
Henry still trades his own money
as a trend follower
with two of his original guys there.
As an investor,
you have to dig deep
past headline reading.
You have to understand
all issues associated
with any investment,
trend-following included.
If you think trend-following died
because John W. Henry
or any other one person
stopped running a trend fund,
you may want to ponder
a more complete view,
not the incomplete one.
Go do the autopsy,
find out why.
And hypothetically,
even if John W. Henry
was the only trend follower
to have ever walked the planet,
his public 30-year track record
provides an objective post-mortem.
Summary food for thought.
John W. Henry's first managed fund
was staked with $16,000 in 1981.
He now owns the Boston Red Sox.
Henry had a four-point
investment philosophy,
long-term trend identification,
highly disciplined investment process,
risk management,
and global diversification.
Ed Seacota.
After you enter the world of markets,
you will eventually run across
Market Wizards by Jack Schwager.
Of all the trader interviews
and market wizards,
the most memorable is with Ed Seacota.
While some may perceive him
as extremely direct,
most will agree his thinking is unique.
One profound and now famous
statement of his,
everybody gets what they want
out of the market.
This was a response
to a question about trading,
but I feel certain
Seacota would say
it also applies to life.
Even though he is almost unknown
to both traders and laymen alike,
Seacota's achievements
rank him as one of the great
trend followers and traders
of all time.
I first met him
at a small beachside cafe.
I had received an invitation
from him to get together
to discuss the outreach
possibilities of the internet.
During that first meeting,
he asked me what I thought
Richard Dennis was looking for
when he hired his student traders,
the turtles.
Seacota knew my website,
www.turtletrader.com.
My reply was to say
Dennis was looking for students
who could think in terms of odds.
His response was to ask
if my reply was my own thinking
or something I was told
by someone else.
This was my indoctrination
to his direct nature.
This story passed along
from an associate
is pure Seacota.
I attended a day-long seminar
in February 1995
in Toronto, Canada,
where Seacota was one
of the guest speakers.
The whole audience peppered him
with questions like,
do you like gold?
Where do you think the Canadian
dollar is headed?
How do you know when there
is a top?
How do you know when the trend
is up, et cetera?
To each of these he replied,
I like gold.
It's shiny, pretty,
makes nice jewelry.
Or I have no idea
where the Canadian dollar
is headed or the trend is up
when the price is moving up,
et cetera.
His replies were simple,
straightforward answers
to the questions asked of him.
Later I learned
through the event organizer
that a large majority
of the audience who paid
good money, presumably
to learn the secrets of trading
from a market wizard,
were not impressed.
Many felt they had wasted
their time and money
listening to him.
Seacota's message couldn't
be clearer to anyone who cared
to listen.
The answers were found
in the very questions
each person asked.
Don't ask, how do you know
the trend is moving up?
Instead ask, what is going
to tell me the trend is up?
Not, what do you think of gold?
Instead ask, am I correctly
trading gold?
Seacota's answers effectively
placed everyone in front
of a huge mirror,
reflecting their trading self
back at them.
If you don't even know
the question to ask
about trading, much less
the answers, get out
of the business
and spend your life doing
something you enjoy.
Think about how you would have
reacted to his speech.


# Chapter 7

PERFORMANCE
SACOTA earned, after fees, nearly 60% on average each year from 1990 to 2000, managing proprietary
money in his Managed Futures program. But he is different than Harding, Henry, and Dunn.
He literally has been a one-man shop his entire career. There is no fancy office or
other employees. He does not hold himself out as a fund manager, and he is extremely
selective of clients. He does not care whether people have money or that they want him to
trade or not. SACOTA takes big risks and he gets big rewards. That takes a strong stomach.
SACOTA was born in 1946. He earned his Bachelor of Science from MIT in 1969, and by 1972 had
embarked on the trading career he pursues to this day, investing for his own account
and the accounts of a few select others. He was self-taught, but influenced in his career
by Amos Hostetter and Richard Doncian. Originally he took a job with a major broker. He then
conceived and developed the first commercial computerized trading system for client money
in the futures markets. And, according to Market Wizards, he increased one client's
account from $5,000 to $15 million in 12 years. His trading is largely confined to the few
minutes it takes to run his internally written computer program, which generates trading signals
for the next day. He also mentors traders through his website and his trading tribe,
a widespread community of like-minded traders. He has served as a teacher and mentor to
some great traders, including Michael Marcus and David Drusz.
The Secret
SACOTA debunks market ignorance with terse, Zen-like statements that force the listener
to look inward. The biggest secret about success is that there isn't any big secret
about it, or if there is, then it's a secret from me too. The idea of searching for some
secret for trading success misses the point. That self-deprecating response emphasizes
process over outcome, but don't be misled by his modesty, for he gets impatient with
hypocrisy and mindlessness. He is a fearless trader and does not suffer fools gladly.
Yet, when he remembers his first trade, I saw the passion. The first trade I remember
I was about five years old in Portland, Oregon. My father gave me a gold-colored medallion,
a sales-promotion trinket. I traded it to a neighbor kid for five magnifying lenses.
I felt as though I had participated in a rite of passage. Later, when I was thirteen,
my father showed me how to buy stocks. He explained that I should buy when the price
broke out of the top of a box and to sell when it broke out of the bottom. And that's
how I got started. Later on, he was more directly inspired.
I saw a letter published by Richard Donchin, which implied that a purely mechanical trend-following
system could beat the markets. This, too, seemed impossible to me. So I wrote computer
programs, on punch cards in those days, to test the theories. Amazingly, his Donchin
theories tested true. To this day, I'm not sure I understand why or whether I really
need to. Anyhow, studying the markets and backing up my opinions with money was so fascinating
compared to my other career opportunities at the time that I began trading full-time
for a living. Trading was now in his blood, and at age twenty-three he went out on his
own with about a half-dozen accounts in the $10,000 to $25,000 range. He found an alternative
to the Wall Street career built only on commissions. From the beginning, he worked for incentive
fees alone. If he made money for his clients, he got paid. If he did not make money, he
did not get paid. Most brokers, index fund managers, and hedge funds don't work like
that. Never mind the cheese. As a new trader,
Dakota passed through Commodities Corporation, a trader training ground in Princeton, New
Jersey. One of his mentors was Amos Hostetter. Hostetter made phenomenal amounts of money
trading. When a market's supply and demand prospects looked promising, Hostetter would
put up one-third of his ultimate position. If he lost twenty-five percent, he'd get
out. Never mind the cheese, he'd crack. Let me out of the trap. But when the market
swung his way, he'd add another third, taking a final position when prices climbed
half as high as he thought they'd go. Hostetter's strategies were so successful, they were computerized
so other traders could learn to duplicate his success. His get-out-of-the-trap strategies
influenced many top traders of the last thirty years. Who else passed through Commodities
Corp.? Traders with names like Paul Tudor Jones, Bruce Kovner, Louis Bacon, and Michael
Marcus paid their dues there. Interestingly, in the mid-1990s, long after the majority
of well-known trend followers had left, I visited Commodities Corporation's offices. Midway
through the tour, I bumped into a stressed-out energy trader. After a few minutes of conversation,
we began to chat about his trading style, which was based on fundamentals. Throughout
the entire conversation, he was glued to the monitor. When I brought up trend following,
he assured me it did not work. I was surprised that a trader working for a famous firm known
for training brilliant trend followers was completely blinded to even the possibility
that trend following worked. I realized then even those closest to trend following's
roots had no appreciation for it.
System Dynamics Along with Hostetter, MIT's Jay Forrester
was a strong influence on the then-young Dakota. One of my mentors, Jay Forrester, was a stickler
for clear writing, a sign of clear thinking. Forrester taught Dakota about system dynamics,
which is a method for studying the world around us. Unlike other scientists who study
the world by breaking it up into smaller and smaller pieces, system dynamicists look
at things as a whole. The central concept of system dynamics is to understand how
all the objects in a system interact with one another. A system can be anything from
a steam engine to a bank account to a basketball team. The objects and people in a system interact
through feedback loops, where a change in one variable affects other variables over
time, which in turn affects the original variable and so on.
An example of this is money in a bank account. Money in the bank earns interest, which
increases the size of the account. Now the account is larger, it earns even more interest,
which adds more money to the account. This goes on and on. What system dynamics attempts
to do is understand the basic structure of a system and thus understand the behavior
it can produce. Many of these systems and problems that are analyzed can be built as
models on a computer. System dynamics takes advantage of the fact a computer model
can be of much greater complexity and carry out more simultaneous calculations than can
the mental model of the human mind. This type of thought process and computer modeling
is not only a foundation of his success, but also can be seen across the entire trend-following
success landscape.
FAQs. Examples of Sakoda's clear wisdom. To avoid whipsaw losses, stop trading.
Lesson. You will have losses, accept them. Here's the essence of risk management. Risk
no more than you can afford to lose and also risk enough so that a win is meaningful. If
there is no such amount, don't play. Lesson. Position sizing or money management
is crucial. Trend-following is an exercise in observing
and responding to the ever-present moment of now. Traders who predict the future dwell
upon a non-existent place, and to the extent they also park their ability to act out there,
they can miss opportunities to act in the now.
Lesson. All you have is now. It is much better to react to the fact of market movements in
present time than a future time that doesn't exist. Markets are fundamentally volatile.
No way around it. Your problem is not in the math. There is no math to get you out
of having to experience uncertainty. Lesson. You can crunch all the numbers you
like, but your gut still has to handle the ups and downs. You have to live with and feel
the uncertainty. I recall, in the old days, people showing
a lot of concern that markets are different and trend-following methods no longer work.
Lesson. Today or yesterday, skeptics abound. They sound like broken records in their desires
to see trend-following debunked. It can be very expensive to try to convince
the markets you are right. Lesson. Go with the flow. Leave your personal
or fundamental opinions at the door. Do you want to be right or make money? Losers try
to convince everyone they are right. When magazine covers get pretty emotional,
get out of the position. There's nothing else in the magazine that works very well,
but the covers are pretty good. This is not an indictment of the magazine people.
It's just that at the end of a big move there is a communal, psychological abreaction
that shows up on the covers of magazines. Lesson. Crowd psychology is real and the price
reflects all. Students.
Sakota's track record is impressive, but one of his students, Isan Khatir, offered
a warning. Journalists, interviewers, and such like to hedge their praise and use phrases
such as, one of the best traders, etc. If one looks at Ed Sakota's model account
record and compares it with anyone else, historical or contemporary, he is the best
trader in history, period. Isn't he? Who else comes close? I don't know of anyone.
Livermore made fortunes, but had drawdowns to zero. There are numerous examples of
managers with a few years of meteoric returns who subsequently blow up. The
household names, Buffett and Soros, are less than half of Ed's return each year.
One might apply filters such as sharp ratios, AUM, etc., and perhaps massage the
results. But as far as the one central metric, raw percentage profit, Ed is
above anyone else I know, and I've been around managing money for twenty years.
And Russell provided a glimpse into the Sakota process. Through working with Ed, I have
learned many things in the past couple of years. One of the most important being,
apply trend following to your life as well as to your trading. Freeing yourself
from the need to understand why is as useful when dealing with family, friends,
and foes as it is when entering or exiting a trade. It also has the added
benefit of making you a much better trader. Russell further sees the
simplicity. There is simplicity beyond sophistication. Ed spends a lot of time
there. He listens, he feels, he speaks with clarity. He is a master of his craft. Before
working with Ed, I spent years learning, reading, and earning various designations.
All of this has been useful as it provides me with a high level of
technical proficiency. However, somehow through this whole process, I have gained
a strong appreciation for simplifying. Miles Davis was once asked what went
through his mind when he listened to his own music. He said,
I always listen to what I can leave out. That sounds like Ed.
David Drews, featured in my book, The Little Book of Trading, described working with Sakota.
It was one of the most incredible experiences of my life. He is the smartest trader I've
ever seen. I don't think anybody comes close. He has the greatest insights into how markets
work and how people operate. It's almost scary being in his presence. It was tough
surviving working with him because of the mental gymnastics involved. If you have a
personality weakness, he finds it fast. But it's a positive thing because successful
traders must understand themselves and their psychological weaknesses. My time with Ed was
one of the greatest times of my life and gave me tremendous confidence. But I don't trade any
differently because of it. A guy like Ed Sakota is magic.
Sakota would be the first to say he is no magician. Although it may be human nature
to attribute phenomenal trading success to magical powers, trend-following is a form
of trial and error. The errors are all the small losses incurred while trying to find
those big trends. Jim Hammer felt it was important to talk life beyond the markets.
I lived with Ed and his family for a little over two months in early 1997. One of the more
amazing things I observed about Ed is that he has gifts in so many areas, trading being just one
of them. He showed me a music video that he produced many years ago. It was an excellent
production. He also recorded an album several years before the video. He is a very talented
musician. My favorite song was Bull Market, which he used to play for me on his acoustic guitar.
During the time I was with him, he was very involved in experiments that attempted to
redefine air flows as they relate to the Bernoulli principle. He spent an enormous
amount of time putting together academic papers and sending them to several experts in
the field concerning this work. He is the consummate scientist. One day we took a field
trip to visit Ed's state legislator to discuss charter school legislation and the impact on Ed's
children and the students of Nevada. Not long after I left, Ed ran for the local school board.
He has a keen interest in and knowledge of education. Ed's Dakota will never be defined
solely by trading. He has a love of learning and is a modern day Renaissance man. Summary,
food for thought. Ed's Dakota. Win or lose, everybody gets what they want out of the
market. Some people seem to like to lose, so they win by losing money.
Dakota. To avoid whipsaw losses, stop trading. Dakota. Until you master the basic literature
and spend some time with successful traders, you might consider confining your trading to
the supermarket. Dakota. I don't predict a non-existing future. Keith Campbell.
Considering he founded one of the largest, in terms of client assets, and oldest, trend-following
firms, Keith Campbell and his firm, Campbell & Company, were nearly non-existent for their
first three decades. Back in the day, a search revealed little to no information. Like many of
the earliest trend-following traders, their returns and legacy are a matter of public record,
if you know where to look. But as 2017 shows, the firm has evolved. As the world of funds
and quant strategy has changed and investor needs have expanded, Campbell's approach
has shifted some. While still possessing a trend-following core expertise, the firm also
offers a number of strategies oriented around other alpha generators. Several members of
their firm have appeared on my podcast, and their transparency in discussing their
evolution is refreshing. But for a moment, let's go back in time to the roots. In the
1960s, Keith Campbell took a job in California where he could both ski and surf, a healthy
motivation. When his roommate moved out of their apartment, he advertised for a replacement
and ended up with Chet Conrad, a commodity broker. Campbell recalled that,
''Conrad got me into trading as a customer, but he was always moaning he didn't have
enough money to trade.'' Campbell then put together $60,000 from 12 investors to form
his first futures fund with three advisors, a fundamentalist, a bar chartist, and a point-and-figure
advocate. When that fund struggled, he started the Campbell Fund and took it over on January
1, 1972. A few years later, Campbell and Conrad went their separate ways. Conrad relocated
to Lake Tahoe, Nevada, on a gutsy sugar trade that turned a borrowed $10,000 into $3 million.
Campbell remained with his fund and now has seen his firm through formal succession plans
to ensure continuity of leadership. He stepped away from overseeing day-to-day operations.
Yet it is unfair to refer to Campbell & Company with the word ''commodity'' alone because
Campbell trades far more than commodities. They currently deploy several dozen models
across commodities, fixed income, foreign exchange, and cash equities. They've also
evolved risk management enhancements that allow strategies with constant or dynamic risk targets.
Will Andrews, CEO at Campbell & Company.
We have great pride in our diversified flagships and our experience and trend following. That
continues to be the core of our offering, but we recognize the need for a broader set
of strategies and access points for our evolving client base.
But I still love that early Campbell wisdom, those legendary pearls. For example, one Campbell
executive noted back in the day, ''I'm very uncomfortable with black box trading
where I'm dealing with algorithms I don't understand. Everything we do we could do
on the back of an envelope with a pencil.'' That back-of-an-envelope remark is a revelation
to those that imagine trend following trading as overly complex, and by no means do I imply
running a multi-billion dollar fund with multiple strategies is simple. It's not. But
trend following as a strategy can always be explained on the back of an envelope, even
if it's a big envelope. The real lesson with Campbell, like with
other great trend followers, is the discipline to stick to rules in tough times. Mike Harris,
at Campbell & Company, however, wanted me to see Campbell today, too. We've also seen
investor interest come full circle after years of being pushed to offer solutions beyond trend
following. More recently, we've seen renewed interest in our pure trend strategies and
the potential crisis alpha they can provide. Our dynamic trend strategy is a good example
of responding to this interest. We've been able to combine our years of expertise and
trend following with a sophisticated dynamic risk targeting framework that's designed with
a specific goal of delivering returns during equity crisis periods. Many investors have
told us that they look to trend following allocations specifically for that equity crisis
protection, so we've developed programs with that focus.
Campbell vs. Benchmarks While I am no proponent of benchmarking,
the following chart, Table 2.3 and the Supplemental PDF, shows drawdown comparisons across asset
classes. Table 2.3, Worst Case Cumulative Percentage
Decline, January 1988 through December 2016. S&P, 51%, October 2007 to February 2009.
Fidelity Magellan, 73%, March 2000 to February 2009.
Campbell Managed Futures, 29%, July 1993 to January 1995.
Bloomberg-Barkley U.S. Aggregate Index, 5%, January 1994 through June 1994.
Many skeptics like to think trend followers are the only ones with drawdowns. The chart,
however, shows the truth of drawdowns across several indexes and fund types. The key is
to accept drawdowns and be able to manage them when they occur. Otherwise, you are left
watching the NASDAQ drop 77% peak to trough over 2000 to 2002 with no plan on what
to do next. Still, Campbell's strategies were often doubted
by Wall Street, especially the old guard efficient market types that griped about the
riskiness of trend following. Campbell Counters A common perception is that futures markets
are extremely volatile and that investing in futures is therefore very risky, much riskier
than equity investments. The reality is that, while not for everyone,
generally futures prices are less volatile than common stock prices. It is the amount
of leverage available in futures which creates the perception of high risk, not market volatility.
The actual risk involved in futures trading depends, among other things, upon how much
leverage is used. Managing leverage is a crucial component for risk management regardless
of strategy. It is a key part that allows traders to keep coming back day after day
and year after year to trade and win. Correlation and Consistency
Most trend followers earn their returns at different times than common benchmark measures,
such as the S&P stock index. Campbell, see table 2.4 also in the supplemental PDF, is
lowly correlated with major stock market indices. Table 2.4, correlation analysis between Campbell
composite and S&P 500 index January 1988 through December 2016. Both positive, 132
of 348 months. Opposite, 160 of 348 months. Both negative, 56 of 348 months. Even more
remarkable than the low correlation to the S&P, Campbell's performance, see table 2.5
in the supplemental PDF, is consistent over total months, total years, and five rolling
time windows. Qualitatively, you are not terribly more knowledgeable about Campbell and company
now, but quantitatively, their performance numbers demonstrate something way more than
an anomaly or luck. Summary food for thought. Will Andrews. With 45 years of experience,
the one thing we know is that the markets never stop evolving and you must evolve
with them. Mike Harris. This brave new world and its
unknowns are scary for most people, but we see it as a potential opportunity as a lot
of re-pricing could need to happen. A dramatic drop in correlation between asset classes
and markets improves opportunities. Markets are slow to price and changes, which often
leads to trends. We can capture large moves whether up or down.
Jerry Parker. I first visited Jerry Parker's original office
in Mannequin-Sabbatt, Virginia, in 1994. Mannequin-Sabbatt is a rural Richmond suburb.
It's in the sticks. I make that point because a few months before I was in Solomon
Brothers' office in Lower Manhattan, gazing for the first time across their huge trading
floor, which seemed like the epicenter of Wall Street, the light bulb of geographic
irrelevance went off when Parker's unpretentious offices in Mannequin-Sabbatt hit my eyes.
You never would have guessed this was where the thoughtful, laid-back CEO of Chesapeake
Capital Management managed over one billion dollars. Parker grew up in Lynchburg, Virginia,
and graduated from the University of Virginia. He was working as an accountant in Richmond
when he applied to Richard Dennis' training program and was the first student Dennis
accepted. Pragmatic and consistent, he went on to start his own money management firm,
Chesapeake Capital, in 1988. He made the decision to risk less and make less for clients, so
he took his turtle approach, a trend-following strategy, and ratcheted it down a few degrees.
In other words, he took an aggressive system for making money and customized it to investors
who were comfortable with lower leverage. Even though he was shooting for lower risk,
he returned 61.82 percent on his money in one incredible year of 1993. That put his firm
on the map. However, he is generally in the 12 to 14 percent return range today. His
more conservative approach to trend-following is different than Dunn, who has always pushed
systems for absolute returns. Parker does it a little differently, but no less successfully.
I have always walked away from him impressed each time at how straightforward and unassuming
he was. Skeptics
Parker gave a rare speech at the height of the dot-com bubble. His address covered a full
range of trend-following philosophies. However skeptical Parker's audience, it did not prevent
him from offering simple, direct, and solid advice about trading to those willing to accept
it.
DANGERS OF A BUY AND HOLD MENTALITY
The strategy of buy and hold is bad. Hold for what? A key to successful traders is their ability
to leverage investments. Many traders are too conservative in their willingness to leverage.
FOLLY OF PREDICTING WHERE MARKETS MAY BE HEADED
I don't know, nor do I care. The system that we use at Chesapeake is about the
market knowing where it's going.
HIS TREND-FOLLOWING TRADING SYSTEM
This flies in the face of what clients want, fancy schools, huge research, an intuitive
approach that knows what's going to happen before it happens. That is, be overweight in
the stock market before the rate cut. But obviously, you can't know what's going
to happen before it happens, and maybe the rate cut is the start of a major trend, and
maybe it's okay to get in after. That's our approach. No bias, short or long.
COUNTER TREND OR DAY TRADING The reason for it is a lot of traders as well
as clients don't like trend-following. It's not intuitive, not natural, too long-term,
not exciting enough.
THE WISHFUL THINKING OF MARKET DISASTER VICTIMS
They said the market's wrong. It'll come back. The market is never wrong.
Ask yourself if you want to be right or do you want to win. They are different questions.
INTELLIGENCE Trend-following success is much more predicated
on discipline than pure academic achievement. Parker is candid about intelligence. We have
a system in which we do not have to rely on our intellectual capabilities. One of the
main reasons why what we do works on the markets is that no one can figure out what
is happening. The great trend-followers admit pure IQ is no savior. They also know the latest
news of the day does not figure into decisions about when to buy, when to sell, or how much
to buy or sell. Parker adds, Our pride and opinion should not interfere
with sound trading approaches.
SALEM ABRAHAM SALEM ABRAHAM does it differently than most.
He truly proves physical location is meaningless. It would be hard to find a financial firm in
the United States as removed from Wall Street, geographically and culturally, as Abraham Trading
Company. Housed in the same building where his grandfather Malouf Abraham once chewed
the fat with local politicians and ranchers, the company has evolved into one of the nation's
most unusual trading operations. It was while he was a student at Notre Dame
University that Abraham found he had a natural ability for and interest in trading.
Like Greg Smith, one of Sakota's students, he researched which traders were the most
successful and discovered trend-following. Abraham returned home to the family ranch
in Canadian, Texas, after graduating and discussed the idea of trading for a living
with his granddad, who cautiously agreed to help him get started as a trader.
According to Abraham, he was to try it out for six months and then discard the idea,
throw the quote machine out the window if he failed.
There was no failure for Abraham. He quickly developed a Wall Street business in the most
anti-Wall Street way. Abraham's firm's culture is astonishingly different. No one
if the company has an Ivy League degree. Most of the employees at Abraham Trading
have backgrounds working at the areas feedlots or natural gas drilling and pipeline companies.
Their training and the complexities of trading and arbitrage is provided on the job.
This beach shoveling manure at 6 a.m. in the morning, says Jeff Dockray,
who was hired as a clerk for Mr. Abraham after working at a feedlot near Canadian.
The financial markets are complicated, but they're not as relentless as dealing
with livestock all the time. Abraham's meat and potatoes approach to trading.
The underlying premise of Abraham Trading's approach is that commodity interests will,
from time to time, enter into periods of major price change to either a higher or lower level.
These price changes are known as trends which have been observed and recorded
since the beginning of market history. There is every reason to believe that in
free markets prices will continue to trend. The trading approach used by Abraham is designed
to exploit these price moves. When asked about his relationship with Jerry Parker,
Abraham gave an example of six degrees of separation.
We do in fact know Jerry Parker with Chesapeake Capital. The shortest version I can give you
is he is my dad's sister's husband's brother's daughter's husband. I'm not sure you can call
that related but something like that. I first learned about the futures industry by talking
to him while he visited in-laws in Texas. The lesson learned? Keep your eyes open to
possibilities, as you never know when opportunity will appear. At the same time, however, Parker
knew Abraham's age and success could cause problems. Sometimes people have a tendency
to resent a young guy who's making so much money. I just think he has a lot of guts.
The core lesson to be learned from Abraham is that if you want to become a trend follower,
get out there and meet the players. Parker and Abraham are realists. They play the zero-sum
game hard in similar ways and excel at it. But they have also found a way to balance their lives.
Without compromising integrity, they have found a way to apply their trend trading philosophy.
Summary food for thought. Jerry Parker.
A key to successful traders is their ability to leverage investments.
Many traders are too conservative in their willingness to leverage.
Parker. A lot of traders, as well as clients, don't like trend following.
It's not intuitive, not natural, too long-term, not exciting enough.
Parker. The market is never wrong. More on Jerry Parker and Salem Abraham can be found in my
second book, Turtle Trader. Richard Dennis. Richard Dennis is retired. His exit was often
misinterpreted by the press as a death knell for trend following. It is true Dennis's career had
big ups and downs, but trend following never stopped. Dennis was born and raised in Chicago
in close proximity to the exchanges. He began trading as a teenager with $400 saved from his
pizza delivery job. Because he was too young to qualify for membership on the exchange,
he would send signals to his father who would do the actual trading.
At 17, he finally landed a job in the pit as a runner on the exchange floor and started trading.
Turtle Traders. Eventually, Dennis would achieve fantastic wealth with profits in the hundreds
of millions of dollars. However, his real fame would come from his experiment in teaching
trading to new traders. In 1983, he made a bet with his partner, William Eckhart.
Dennis believed trading could be taught. Eckhart belonged to the,
You're born with it or you're not, camp. They decided to experiment by seeing whether
they could teach novices successful trading. Twenty-plus students were accepted into two
separate training programs. Legend has it Dennis named his students turtles after visiting a turtle
breeding farm in Singapore. How did it start? Dennis ran classified ads saying,
Trader wanted and was immediately overwhelmed by some 1,000 queries from would-be traders.
He picked 20-plus novices, trained them for two weeks, and then gave them money to trade
for his firm. His turtles included two professional gamblers, a fantasy game designer,
an accountant, and a juggler. Jerry Parker, the former accountant who now manages more
than $1 billion, was one of several who went on to become top money managers.
Although Dennis appears to own the mantle of trend-following teaching professor,
there are many other trend-followers, including Sakoda, Don, and Henry,
who have served as teachers to successful traders. Also, keep in mind, not all the
turtles turned out winners. After they left Dennis's tutelage, several turtles failed,
for example, Curtis Faith, who later served jail time. Perhaps two, after some turtles
went out on their own, they could not cope without the safety net. Jerry Parker is a monster
exception to that theory. He is absolutely the most successful of the turtles. This is
not a criticism of the system Dennis taught his students. It is rather an acknowledgement
that some could not stick with his trading system. In stark contrast, Bill Dunn was completely
unknown to the general public when the turtles burst onto the scene in the 1980s. Since that
time, Dunn has slowly overtaken all turtles in terms of absolute performance. I wonder if something
about the initial one-man shop of Dunn set in motion habits enabling his firm to roar past the
turtles, who had the head start. For years, many turtles also refused to acknowledge they were
trend-followers, while Dunn was candid. Maybe the hype and mystery set forward in the Market
Wizards book did not help in the long run. Nevertheless, the story of the turtles is so
amazing still in 2017 that the criteria Dennis used to select his students is insightful.
Selection Process Dale DeLutri, a former executive at Dennis's firm,
managed the turtle group. He said they were looking for smarts and for people who had odd
ideas. Ultimately, they selected several blackjack players, an actor, a security guard, and a designer
of the fantasy game Dungeons & Dragons. One of the ways they screened candidates was by having them
answer true or false questions. The following true or false questions were sent to the turtles
and were used to decide who was picked and who went home. One. One should favor being long or
being short, whichever one is comfortable with. Two. On initiation, one should know precisely at
what price to liquidate if a profit occurs. Three. One should trade the same number of
contracts in all markets. Four. If one has $100,000 to risk, one ought to risk $25,000 on every trade.
Five. On initiation, one should know precisely where to liquidate if a loss occurs.
Six. You can never go broke taking profits. Seven. It helps to have the fundamentals in
your favor before you initiate. Eight. A gap up is a good place to initiate
if an uptrend has started. Nine. If you anticipate buy stops in the market,
wait until they are finished and buy a little higher than that.
Ten. Of three types of orders, market stop and resting, market orders cost the least skid.
Eleven. The more bullish news you hear and the more people are going long,
the less likely the uptrend is to continue after a substantial uptrend.
Twelve. The majority of traders are always wrong.
Thirteen. Trading bigger is an overall handicap to one's trading performance.
Fourteen. Larger traders can muscle markets to their advantage.
Fifteen. Vacations are important for traders to keep the proper perspective.
Sixteen. Under trading is almost never a problem.
Seventeen. Ideally, average profits should be about three or four times average losses.
Eighteen. A trader should be willing to let profits turn into losses.
Nineteen. A very high percentage of trades should be profits.
Twenty. A trader should like to take losses.
Twenty-one. It is especially relevant when the market is higher than it's been in four and 13
weeks. Twenty-two. Needing and wanting money are good motivators to good trading.
Twenty-three. One's natural inclinations are good guides to decision making and trading.
Twenty-four. Luck is an ingredient in successful trading over the long run.
Twenty-five. When you're long, limit up is a good place to take a profit.
Twenty-six. It takes money to make money.
Twenty-seven. It's good to follow hunches in trading.
Twenty-eight. There are players in each market one should not trade against.
Twenty-nine. All speculators die broke.
Thirty. The market can be understood better through social psychology than through economics.
Thirty-one. Taking a loss should be a difficult decision for traders.
Thirty-two. After a big profit, the next trend following trade is more likely to be a loss.
Thirty-three. Trends are not likely to persist.
Thirty-four. Almost all information about a commodity
is at least a little useful in helping make decisions.
Thirty-five. It's better to be an expert in one to two markets rather than try to trade
ten or more markets. Thirty-six. In a winning streak, total risk should rise dramatically.
Thirty-seven. Trading stocks is similar to trading commodities.
Thirty-eight. It's a good idea to know how much you are ahead or behind during a trading session.
Thirty-nine. A losing month is an indication of doing something wrong.
Forty. A losing week is an indication of doing something wrong.
Forty-one. The big money in trading is made when one can get long at lows after a big downtrend.
Forty-two. It's good to average down when buying.
Forty-three. After a long trend, the market requires more consolidation before another trend starts.
Forty-four. It's important to know what to do if trading in commodities doesn't succeed.
Forty-five. It is not helpful to watch every quote in the markets one trades.
Forty-six. It is a good idea to put on or take off a position all at once.
Forty-seven. Diversification in commodities is better than always being in one or two markets.
Forty-eight. If a day's profit or loss makes a significant difference to your net worth,
you're over-trading. Forty-nine. A trader learns more from his losses than his profits.
Fifty. Except for commission and brokerage fees, execution costs for entering orders are
minimal over the course of a year. Fifty-one. It's easier to trade well than to trade poorly.
Fifty-two. It's important to know what success and trading will do for you later in life.
Fifty-three. Up trends end when everyone gets bearish.
Fifty-four. The more bullish news you hear, the less likely a market is to break out on the
upside. Fifty-five. For an off-floor trader, a long-term trade ought to last three or four weeks
or less. Fifty-six. Others' opinions of the market are good to follow. Fifty-seven. Volume and open
interest are as important as price action. Fifty-eight. Daily strength and weakness is a
good guide for liquidating long-term positions with big profits. Fifty-nine. Off-floor traders
should spread different markets of different market groups. Sixty. The more people are going
long, the less likely an uptrend is to continue in the beginning of a trend.
Sixty-one. Off-floor traders should not spread different delivery months of the same commodity.
Sixty-two. Buying dips and selling rallies is a good strategy.
Sixty-three. It's important to take a profit most of the time.
Not all were true or false. Dennis also asked essay questions.
One. What were your standard test results on college entrance exams?
Two. Name a book or movie you like and why. Three. Name a historical figure you like
and why. Four. Why would you like to succeed at this job? Five. Name a risky thing you have done
and why. Six. Explain a decision you have made under pressure and why that was your decision.
Seven. Hope, fear, and greed are said to be enemies of good traders. Explain a decision
you may have made under one of these influences and how you view that decision now.
Eight. What are some good qualities you have that might help in trading?
Nine. What are some bad qualities you have that might hurt in trading?
Ten. In trading, would you rather be good or lucky? Why?
Eleven. Is there anything else you'd like to add?
Those questions might seem simplistic, but Dennis did not care. I suppose I didn't like
the idea that everyone thought I was crazy or going to fail, but it didn't make any substantial
difference because I had an idea what I wanted to do and how I wanted to do it.
Dennis placed passion to achieve at the top. You have to wake up with inner drive and desire
to make it happen. You have to go for it. He also outlined the trend-following problem with
profit targets, a key lesson taught to the turtles. When you have a position, you put it
on for a reason and you've got to keep it on until the reason no longer exists.
Don't take profits just for the sake of taking profits. Dennis made it clear if you didn't know
when a trend would end, but you did know it could go significantly higher, then don't get off.
Yet even though some of his turtle students had successful money management careers,
Dennis did not do well when trading for clients. His most recent stab at managing
money for others resulted in a compounded annual return of 26.9% after fees.
That included two years when performance was over 100%.
But he stopped trading for clients after a drawdown in 2000.
His clients pulled their money right before his trading would have rebounded.
Doubt me. Use Dunn Capital or any other trend follower as a proxy
and you will see what happened in the fall of 2000. If those impatient clients had stayed with
Dennis, they would have been richly rewarded. One of the most crucial lessons a trader can
learn is trading for your own account and for clients are different. John W. Henry was blunt
with me saying it was never easy losing money for clients. On the other hand, traders who
concentrate on expanding their own capital have a great advantage. Fund managers must always deal
with the pressure and expectations of clients. Summary food for thought.
Richard Dennis. Trading was even more teachable than I imagined. In a strange sort of way,
it was almost humbling. Dennis. When you have a position, you put it on for a reason
and you've got to keep it until the reason no longer exists.
Don't take profits just for the sake of taking profits.
You have to have a strategy to trade, know how it works, and follow through on it.
Dennis. You don't get any profits from fundamental analysis, you get profit from buying and selling.
The narrative of Richard Dennis and his students can be found in my book, Turtle Trader.
Richard Doncian. Richard Doncian is known as the father of trend following. His original
technical trading system became the foundation on which later trend followers built their systems.
From the time he started the industry's first managed fund in 1949 until his death,
he shared his research and served as a teacher and mentor to numerous present-day trend followers.
Doncian was born in 1905 in Hartford, Connecticut. He graduated from Yale in 1928 with a B.A. in
economics. He was so fascinated by trading that even after losing his investments in the 1929
stock market crash, he returned to work on Wall Street. In 1930, he managed to borrow some
capital to trade shares in Auburn Auto, what William Baldwin in his article on Doncian called
the Apple Computer of its Day. The moment after he made several thousand dollars on the trade,
he became a market technician, charting prices and formulating buy and sell strategies without
concern for an investment's basic value. From 1933 to 1935, Doncian wrote a technical market
letter for Hemp Hill Noise & Company. He stopped his financial career to serve as an Air Force
Statistical Control Officer in World War II, but returned to Wall Street after the war and
became a market letter writer for Shearson, Hamill & Company. He began to keep detailed
technical records on futures prices, recording daily price data in a ledger book. Barbara Dixon,
one of his students, observed how he computed his moving averages and posted his own charts by hand,
developing his trend-following signals without the benefit of an accurate database,
software, or any computing capability. His jacket pockets were always loaded down with pencils and
a pencil sharpener. Dixon makes it clear her mentor's work preceded and prefigured that of
academic theorists who developed the modern theory of finance. Long before Harvard's John Littner
published his quantitative analysis of the benefits of including managed futures in a
portfolio with stocks and bonds, Doncian used concepts like diversification and risk control
that won William Sharp and Harry Malkowitz Nobel Prizes in Economics in 1990.
Personification of Persistence Richard Doncian was not an overnight sensation.
After 42 years, Doncian was still managing only $200,000. Then, in his mid-60s,
everything came together, and a decade later, he was managing $27 million at Shearson American
Express, making a million dollars a year in fees and commissions and another million in
trading profits on his own money. Doncian, of course, didn't predict price movements.
He followed them. His explanation for his success was simple and as old as the Dow theory itself.
Trends persist. He added, a lot of people say things like,
gold has got to come down. It went up too fast. That's why 85 percent of commodities
investors lose money. The fundamentals are supposed to be bullish and copper,
but I'm on the short side now because the trend is down.
These classic Doncian trading rules were first published over 75 years ago.
General Guides
1. Beware of acting immediately on a widespread public opinion. Even if correct,
it will usually delay the move. 2. From a period of dullness and inactivity,
watch for and prepare to follow a move in the direction in which volume increases.
3. Limit losses and ride profits irrespective of all other rules.
4. Like commitments are advisable when market position is not certain.
Clearly defined moves are signaled frequently enough to make life interesting
and concentration on these moves will prevent unprofitable whipsawing.
5. Seldom take a position in the direction of an immediately preceding three-day move.
Wait for a one-day reversal. 6. Judicious use of stop orders
is a valuable aid to profitable trading. Stops may be used to protect profits,
to limit losses, and from certain formations, such as triangular foci to take positions.
Stop orders are apt to be more valuable and less treacherous if used in proper
relation to the chart formation. 7. In a market in which upswings are likely
to equal or exceed downswings, heavier position should be taken for the upswings for percentage
reasons. A decline from 50 to 25 will net only 50% profit, whereas an advance from 25 to 50
will net 100% profit. 8. In taking a position, price orders are
allowable. In closing a position, use market orders. 9. Buy strong acting,
strong background commodities, and sell weak ones subject to all other rules.
10. Moves in which rails lead or participate strongly are usually more worth following than
moves in which rails lag. 11. A study of the capitalization of a company,
the degree of activity of an issue, and whether an issue is a lethargic truck horse
or a spirited racehorse is fully as important as a study of statistical reports.
12. Danxian Technical Guidelines
1. A move followed by a sideways range often precedes another move of almost equal extent
in the same direction as the original move. Generally, when the second move from the
sideways range has run its course, a counter move approaching the sideways range may be expected.
2. Reversal or resistance to a move is likely to be encountered
a. On reaching levels at which in the past the commodity has fluctuated for a considerable
length of time within a narrow range b. On approaching highs or lows
3. Watch for good buying or selling opportunities when trend lines are approached, especially on
medium or dull volume. Be sure such a line has not been hugged or hit too frequently.
4. Watch for crawling along or repeated bumping of minor or major trend
lines and prepare to see such trend lines broken. 5. Breaking of minor trend lines
counter to the major trend gives most other important position-taking signals.
Positions can be taken or reversed on stop at such places.
6. Triangles of either slope may mean either accumulation or distribution depending on other
considerations, although triangles are usually broken on the flat side.
7. Watch for volume climax, especially after a long move.
8. Don't count on gaps being closed unless you can distinguish between breakaway gaps,
normal gaps, and exhaustion gaps. 9. During a move, take or increase positions
in the direction of the move at the market the morning following any one-day reversal,
however slight the reversal may be, especially if volume declines on the reversal.
Students Barbara Dixon was one of the more successful
female trend traders in the business. She graduated from Vassar College in 1969,
but because she was a woman and a history major, no one would hire her as a stockbroker.
Undaunted, she finally took a job at Shearson as a secretary for Doncian.
Dixon received three years of invaluable tutelage in trend following under Doncian.
When Doncian moved to Connecticut, she stayed behind to strike out on her own in 1973.
Before long, she had some 40 accounts ranging from $20,000 to well over $1 million.
Dixon saw uncomplicated genius in Doncian's trading.
I'm not a mathematician. I believe that the simple solution is the most elegant and the best.
Nobody has ever been able to demonstrate to me that a complex mathematical equation can answer
the question, is the market moving in an uptrend, downtrend, or sideways, any better than looking at
a price chart and having simple rules to define those three sets of circumstances?
These are the same rules I used back in the late 70s.
Doncian was once again ahead of his time when he taught the importance of fast and simple
decision-making. Dixon was fond of pointing out a good system is one that keeps you alive
and your equity intact when trends evaporate. She explained that the reason for any system
is to get you into the market when a trend establishes. Her message? Don't give up this
system even after a string of losses. That is important because that's just when the profits are
due. She also doesn't attempt to predict price moves, nor expect to be right every time.
She knows she can't forecast the top or bottom of a price move.
The hope is it continues indefinitely because you expect to make money over the long run,
but on individual trades you admit when you're wrong and move on. Today, most market players
still fixate on the new and fresh, fast-money idea of the day. Yet I still find almost every
word Doncian or Dixon wrote, newer, fresher, and more honest than anything currently broadcast on
CNBC. My favorite Doncian wisdom tackles an issue that people are still struggling with in 2017.
It doesn't matter if you're trading stocks or soybeans. Trading is trading, and the name of
the game is increasing your wealth. A trader's job description is stunningly simple. Don't lose
money. This is of utmost importance to new traders who are often told, do your research.
This is good advice, but should be considered carefully. Research alone won't ensure a profit,
and at the end of the day, your main goal should be to make money,
not to get an A in how to read a balance sheet. Richard Doncian's blunt and a touch-too-honest
talk may explain why the Ivy League's finance curriculums do not include his exploits.
Summary food for thought Richard Doncian's account dropped below zero
following the 1929 stock market crash. Doncian was one of the Pentagon whiz kids in World War II
working closely with Robert McNamara. Doncian did not start his trend-following fund until age 65.
He traded into his 90s and personally trained legions in the art of trend-following,
and trained women at a time when women had little respect on Wall Street.
Doncian. Nobody has ever been able to demonstrate to me that a complex mathematical equation can
answer the question, is the market moving in an uptrend, downtrend, or sideways?
Jesse Livermore and Dixon Watts. Richard Doncian had influences, and Jesse Livermore,
born and South Acton, Massachusetts in 1877, was a big one. At the age of 15,
he went to Boston and began working in Payne Weber's Boston brokerage office.
He studied price movements and began to trade their price fluctuations.
When Livermore was in his 20s, he moved to New York City to speculate.
After 40 years of trading, he developed a knack for speculating on price movements.
One of his foremost rules? Never act on tips. The unofficial biography of Livermore was
Reminiscences of a Stock Operator, first published in 1923 and written by journalist Edwin Lefebvre.
Readers likely guessed Lefebvre was a pseudonym for Livermore himself.
Reminiscences of a stock operator went on to become a Wall Street classic. Numerous quotations
and euphemisms from the book are so embedded in trading lore, traders today don't have the
slightest idea where they originated. One. It takes a man a long time to learn
all the lessons of his mistakes. They say there are two sides to everything, but there is only
one side to the stock market, and it is not the bull side or the bear side, but the right side.
Two. I think it was a long step forward in my trading education when I realized at last
that when old Mr. Partridge kept on telling the other customers,
well, you know this is a bull market, he really meant to tell them that the big money was not in
the individual fluctuations but in the main movements, that is, not in reading the tape,
but in sizing up the entire market at its trend.
Three. The reason is that a man may see straight and clearly and yet become impatient
or doubtful when the market takes its time about doing as he figured it must do.
That is why so many men in Wall Street, who are not at all in the sucker class,
not even in the third grade, nevertheless lose money. The market does not beat them,
they beat themselves, because though they have brains they cannot sit tight.
Old Turkey was dead right in doing and saying what he did. He had not only the courage of
his convictions but the intelligent patience to sit tight.
Four. The average man doesn't wish to be told that it is a bull or bear market.
What he desires is to be told specifically which particular stock to buy or sell.
He wants to get something for nothing. He does not wish to work. He doesn't even wish to have
to think. It is too much bother to have to count the money that he picks up from the ground.
Five. A man will risk half his fortune in the stock market with less reflection than he
devotes to the selection of a medium-priced automobile. Think about the wild speculation
that took place during the dot-com bubble of the late 1990s, the wild speculation that ended with
the October 2008 market crash, the current day Federal Reserve market propping, and then remember
Livermore was referring to a market environment nearly 100 years ago. Livermore did write one
book, How to Trade in Stocks, the Livermore formula for combining time, element, and price.
It was published in 1940. The book is difficult to find, but a little persistence paid off.
Livermore was by no means a perfect trader, and he says so. He was no role model. His trading style
was bold and extremely volatile. He went broke several times, making and losing millions.
Yet his personal trading does not detract from his wisdom.
One early trend trader who had an influence on Livermore was Dixon Watts. Watts was the
president of the New York Cotton Exchange between 1878 and 1880. His mindset still inspires in 2017.
All business is more or less speculation. The term speculation, however, is commonly
restricted to business of exceptional uncertainty. The uninitiated believe that chance is so large a
part of speculation that it is subject to no rules, is governed by no laws. This is a serious error.
Let's first consider the qualities essential to the equipment of a speculator. One, self-reliance.
A man must think for himself, must follow his own convictions.
Self-trust is the foundation of successful effort.
Two, judgment. That equipoise, that nice adjustment of the facilities one to the other,
which is called good judgment, is an essential to the speculator.
Three, courage. That is, confidence to act on the decisions of the mind. In speculation,
there is value in Mirabeau's dictum, be bold, still be bold, always be bold.
Four, prudence. The power of measuring the danger together with a certain alertness and
watchfulness is important. There should be a balance of these two, prudence and courage,
prudence in contemplation, courage in execution. Connected with these qualities, properly an
outgrowth of them, is a third, viz., promptness. The mind convinced the act should follow.
Think. Act. Promptly. Five, pliability. The ability to change an opinion, the power of
revision. He who observes, says Emerson, and observes again, is always formidable.
These qualifications are mandatory to achieve successful speculation,
but they must be conducted in a balanced manner. A deficiency or an over-plus of one quality will
destroy the effectiveness of all. The possession of such faculties, in a proper adjustment is,
of course, uncommon. In speculation, as in life, few succeed, many fail.
Jesse Livermore's take is less academic and more emotional than Watts's, but spot-on enduring.
Wall Street never changes, the pockets change, the suckers change, the stocks change. But Wall
Street never changes because human nature never changes. Summary food for thought.
David Ricardo, 1772-1823, inspired and influenced Watts, Livermore, and Doncian.
He was arguably the very first trend-following trader.
Seeing the invisible, otherwise known as risk.
Michael Melissinos. The trend-following philosophy is based on adapting to evolving
conditions in the now. It's about learning from the past in order to make the right decisions
today. The goal is not to eliminate losses from investing, but to manage them in a way
that doesn't kill us. Bill Gurley on Not Pursuing Google.
I go back and the learning is that if you have remarkably asymmetric returns, you have to ask
yourself, how high could up-be and what could go right? Because it's not a 50-50 thing.
If you thought there was a 20% chance, you should still do it because the upside is so high.
Miles Davis. When you hit a wrong note, it's the next note that makes it good or bad.


# Chapter 8

These are the side margin quotations for Chapter 2.
People are Mathophobic, David Harding.
Technical trading is not glamorous.
It will rarely tell you that you bought at the lows and sold at the highs.
But trading should be a business, and a systematic program is a plan to profit over time, rather
than from a single trade.
High expectations are essential to success, but unrealistic ones just waste time.
Teachers do not tell the user how to make profits in the market.
They can only verify our own ideas.
Cognotrend
When I first got into commodities, no one was interested in a diversified approach.
There were cocoa men, cotton men, grain men.
They were worlds apart.
I was almost the first one who decided to look at all commodities together.
Nobody before had looked at the whole picture and had taken a diversified position with
the idea of cutting losses short and going with a trend.
Richard Doncian
One of the only things I could say with certainty was that markets trend because I can observe
trends in any financial market in any time era.
Michael Platt
Hedge fund market wizards
Whenever you can, count.
Sir Francis Galton
The novice trader is at a disadvantage because the intuitions that he is going to have
about the market are going to be the ones that are typical of beginners.
The expert is someone who sees beyond those typical responses.
Charles Faulkner
Like so many others who share his libertarian views, Bill Dunn's journey to free mines and
free markets began in 1963 when he read Ayn Rand's short collection of essays on ethics.
Reason magazine
The beginning is the most important part of the work.
Plato
Gas station proprietor
Look, I need to know what I stand to win.
Anton Shiger
Everything
Gas station proprietor
How's that?
Anton Shiger
You stand to win everything.
Call it.
Gas station proprietor
All right.
Heads then.
Shiger removes his hand, revealing the coin is indeed heads.
Anton Shiger
Well done.
Confidence comes from success, to be sure, but it can also come from recognizing that
a lot of carefully examined failures are themselves one path to success.
Denise Shakerzian
Money management is the true survival key.
Bill Dunn
Change is not merely necessary to life.
It is life.
Alvin Toffler
Men's expectations manifest in trends.
John W. Henry
There is no Holy Grail.
There is no perfect way to capture that move from $100 an ounce to $800 an ounce in gold.
John W. Henry
How are we able to make money by following trends year in and year out?
Trends develop because there's an accumulating consensus on future prices.
Consequently, there's an evolution to the believed true price value over time.
Because investors are human and they make mistakes, they're never 100% sure of their
vision and whether or not their view is correct.
No price adjustments take time as they fluctuate and a new consensus is formed in the face
of changing market conditions and new facts.
For some changes, this consensus is easy to reach.
But there are other events that take time to formulate a market view.
It's those events that take time that form the basis of our profits.
John W. Henry
We have made our business managing risk.
We are comfortable with risk and we get our reward from risk.
John W. Henry
Life is a school of probability.
Walter Badgett
The game of speculation is the most uniformly fascinating game in the world.
But it is not a game for the stupid, the mentally lazy, the person of inferior emotional
balance, or the get-rich-quick adventurer.
They will die poor.
Jesse Livermore
We don't predict the future, but we do know that the next five years will not look like
the last five years.
That just doesn't happen.
Markets change.
And our results over the next three years will not replicate the last three.
They never do.
John W. Henry
There are only a limited number of Fed meetings a year.
However, this is supposed to help us infer the direction of interest rates and help
us manage risk on a daily basis.
How do you manage risk in markets that move 24 hours a day when the fundamental inputs
do not come frequently?
In the grain markets, crop reports are fairly limited, and demand information comes with
significant lags, if at all.
Under these types of conditions, simple approaches, such as following prices, may be better.
Mark S. Rezabzinski
We can't always take advantage of a particular period.
But in an uncertain world, perhaps the investment philosophy that makes the most sense, if
you study the implications carefully, is trend following.
Trend following consists of buying high and selling low.
But trends are an integral, underlying reality in life.
How can someone buy high and sell low and be successful for two decades unless the underlying
nature of markets is to trend?
On the other hand, I've seen year after year brilliant men buying low and selling
high for a while successfully and then growing broke because they thought they understood
why a certain investment instrument had to perform in accordance with their personal
logic.
John W. Henry
Everything Flows
Heraclitus
I always know what's happening on the court.
I see a situation occur and I respond.
Larry Bird
The chief obstacle is that we are quick to be satisfied with ourselves.
If we find someone to call us good men, cautious and principled, we acknowledge him.
We are not content with a moderate eulogy.
But except as our due, whatever flattery has shamelessly heaped upon us, we agree with
those who call us best and wisest.
Although we know they often utter many falsehoods, we indulge ourselves so greatly that we want
to be praised for a virtue which is the opposite of our behavior.
A man hears himself called Most Merciful while he is inflicting torture.
So it follows that we don't want to change because we believe we are already excellent.
Seneca
Win or lose, everybody gets what they want out of the market.
Some people seem to like to lose, so they win by losing money.
Fortunetellers live in the future.
So do people who want to put things off.
So do fundamentalists.
Ed Seacota
Peer-emitting instructions appear on dollar bills.
Add smaller and smaller amounts on the way up.
Keep your eye open at the top.
Ed Seacota
The guy with discretion has what?
A crystal ball?
Lita Braga
I believe babies are born as innovative personalities, but our social processes work to stamp out
exploration and questioning.
Jay Forrester
If a gambler places bets on the input symbol to a communication channel and bets his money
in the same proportion each time a particular symbol is received, his capital will grow
or shrink exponentially.
If the odds are consistent with the probabilities of occurrence of the transmitted symbols, that
is, equal to their reciprocals, the maximum value of this exponential rate of growth
will be equal to the rate of transmission of information.
If the odds are not fair, that is, not consistent with the transmitted symbol probabilities
but consistent with some other set of probabilities, the maximum exponential rate of growth will
be larger than it would have been with no channel by an amount equal to the rate
of transmission of information.
J.L. Kelly, Jr.
For a system trader, it's way more important to have your trading size down than it is
to fine-tune your entry and exit points.
– David Drews
The difference between a successful person and others is not a lack of strength, not a
lack of knowledge, but rather a lack of will.
– Vince Lombardi
Apprenticesing with Ed Zucota is like getting a drink of water at a fire hydrant.
– Thomas Vician, Jr.
You've got to have a longer perspective and confidence in the veracity of the approach
that you're using.
– Campbell & Co.
Consider what is measurable and make measurable what is not so.
– Galileo Galilei
The mathematics are very important, but it's only one piece of the puzzle.
The most important thing overall is the total investment process of which the signal generator
is an important part.
Portfolio structuring, risk management, execution strategies, capital management, and leverage
management may not be directly connected to the algorithm that generates the buy and
sell signals, but they are all hugely important.
– Campbell & Co.
Campbell & Co. analyzes only technical market data, not any economic factors external to
market prices.
Our trend-following methods do not pretend to determine the value of what we are trading,
nor do they determine what that value ought to be, but they do produce absolute returns
fairly consistently.
– Campbell & Co.
Global traders do not need to have a particular expertise in each market that they trade.
They don't need to be an authority on meteorological phenomena, geopolitical occurrences, or the
economic impact of specific worldwide events on a particular market.
– Jerry Parker
I participated in the Richard Dennis Turtle Program.
The methods we were taught and the trading experience received were all a technical approach
to trading the commodity markets.
The most important experience that led me to utilize a technical approach was the amount
of success that I experienced trading Richard's system.
– Jerry Parker
The only cardinal evil on earth is that of placing your prime concern within other men.
I've always demanded a certain quality in the people I liked.
I've always recognized it at once, and it's the only quality I respect in men.
I chose my friends by that.
Now I know what it is, a self-sufficient ego.
Nothing else matters.
– Ayn Rand
Trading was even more teachable than I imagined.
In a strange sort of way, it was almost humbling.
– Richard Dennis
I agree with the metaphysics of technical analysis that the fundamentals are discounted.
You don't get any profits from fundamental analysis.
You get profit from buying and selling.
So why stick with the appearance when you can go right to the reality of price and
analyze it better, Richard Dennis?
There's nothing quite as good or bad as trading.
They give you a number every day.
That's what's good about it, and that's what's bad about it.
That's what makes it hard.
That's what makes it worth doing, Richard Dennis.
All a company report and balance sheet can tell you is the past and the present.
They cannot tell future.
– Nicholas Darvus
Always say yes to the present moment.
Surrender to what is.
Say yes to life and see how life starts suddenly to start working for you rather than against
you.
– Eckhart Tolle
Chance is commonly viewed as a self-correcting process in which a deviation in one direction
induces a deviation in the opposite direction to restore the equilibrium.
In fact, deviations are not corrected as a chance process unfolds.
They are merely diluted.
– Amos Tversky
No trader can control volatility completely, but you can improve your odds.
– Student of Richard Dennis
Whatever you use should be applied in some quantitative, rigorous fashion.
You should use science to determine what works and quantify it.
I'm still surprised today at how I can expect so strongly that a trading methodology will
be profitable, but, after running it through a simulation, I discover it's a loser.
– Paul Raybar
I don't think trading strategies are as vulnerable to not working if people know about
them as most traders believe.
If what you are doing is right, it will work even if people have a general idea about it.
I always say that you could publish trading rules in the newspaper and no one would follow
them.
A key is consistency and discipline.
– Richard Dennis
I became a computer applicant of Dix's, Donchian's, ideas.
He was one of the only people at the time who was doing simulation of any kind.
He was generous with his ideas, making a point to share what he knew.
It delighted him to get others to try systems.
He inspired a great many people and spawned a whole generation of traders, providing courage
and a roadmap.
– Ed Seacota
We started our database using punch cards in 1968 and we collected commodity price data
back to July 1959.
We back tested the five and twenty and the weekly rules for Dick.
I think the weekly method was the best thing that anyone had ever done.
Of all Dick's contributions, the weekly rules helped identify the trend and helped you act
on it.
Dick is one of those people who today likes to beat the computer, only he did it by hand.
– Dennis D. Dunn
I remember in 1979 or 1980 at one of the early Marr conferences being impressed by the
fact that I counted nineteen CTAs who were managing public funds and I could directly
identify sixteen of the nineteen with Dick Donchian.
They had either worked for him or had had monies invested with him.
To me, that's the best evidence of his impact in the early days.
Dick has always been very proud of the fact that his people have prospered.
He also was proud that after too many years in which his was the lone voice in the wilderness,
his thinking eventually came to be the dominant thinking of the industry.
– Brett Elam
Losing an illusion makes you wiser than finding a truth.
– Ludwig Borden
Can one know absolutely when price will trend?
No.
Does one have to know absolutely in order to have a profitable business?
No.
In fact, a great number of businesses are based on the probability that a time-based
series will trend.
In fact, if you look at insurance, gambling, and other related businesses, you will come
to the conclusion that even a small positive edge can mean great profits.
– Forum Post
Nobody will deny that there is at least some roughness everywhere.
– Benoit Mandelbrot
We love volatility and days like the one in which the stock market took a big plunge,
for being on the right side of moving markets is what makes us money.
A stagnant market in any commodity, such as grain has experienced recently, means there's
no opportunity for us to make money.
– Dinesh Desai
Bottomless wonders spring from simple rules, which are repeated without end.
– Benoit Mandelbrot
Neither a state nor a bank ever have had unrestricted power of issuing paper money without abusing
that power.
– David Ricardo
– Benoit Mandelbrot
– Benoit Mandelbrot
– Benoit Mandelbrot
– Benoit Mandelbrot
– Benoit Mandelbrot
– Benoit Mandelbrot
– Benoit Mandelbrot
– Benoit Mandelbrot
– Benoit Mandelbrot
– Benoit Mandelbrot
– Benoit Mandelbrot
– Benoit Mandelbrot
– Benoit Mandelbrot
– Benoit Mandelbrot
– Benoit Mandelbrot
– Benoit Mandelbrot
– Benoit Mandelbrot
– Benoit Mandelbrot
– Benoit Mandelbrot
– Benoit Mandelbrot
– Benoit Mandelbrot
– Benoit Mandelbrot
– Benoit Mandelbrot
– Benoit Mandelbrot


# Chapter 9

Chapter 3. Performance Proof. Even if you are a minority of one, the truth
is the truth. Gandhi. What we've got here is a failure to communicate.
Some men you just can't reach, so you get what we had here last week, which is the
way he wants it. Cool hand, Luke. Anyone can tell you they have a successful
method or system, but the only objective measurement is raw data.
If a claim is to be made, it must be supported. The numbers in this volume across numerous third-party
reporting services and inside disclosures on file with American and international regulatory
authorities don't lie. You could be the skeptic and say, Hold on, the numbers could be faked.
That doesn't fly with decades of data across unrelated traders located in dozens of countries.
This is not about one isolated Bernie Madoff track record opened to hanky-panky. Thus,
in reviewing legendary trend-following performance histories and assorted research studies I
alone might own—my insider investigation methods are a whole other book—I zeroed
in on six key data concepts. One, absolute returns. Two, volatility. Three, drawdowns.
Five, zero-sum. Six, Berkshire Hathaway. Absolute returns. An absolute return trading
strategy means you are trying to make the most money possible. Author Alexander Anikin
defines it succinctly. An absolute return manager is essentially an asset manager without a
benchmark. Benchmarking can be viewed as a method of restricting investment managers
so as to limit the potential for surprises, either positive or negative. Trend-following,
in its purest form, doesn't track or attempt to mimic any particular index, ever. If trend-following
had a coat of arms, absolute returns would be emblazoned upon it. It thrives and profits
from the surprises benchmarking artificially stops. However, not all trend-followers are
shooting for absolute returns or the most amount of money possible. Not all play the
game full tilt. Jerry Parker, for example, purposefully aims for lower returns to cater
to a different client base—those who want less risk and less return. But John W. Henry
long made the case that the overall objective is to provide absolute returns. Relative
return managers, such as most traditional equity or fixed-income managers, are measured
on how they perform relative to some predetermined benchmark. We have no such investment benchmark,
so its aim is to achieve returns in all market conditions and is thus considered an absolute
return manager. Shoot for a benchmark in returns and you run with the crowd. Benchmarks,
such as the S&P, might make you feel safe, even when that feeling is clearly artificial.
Indexing, on the other hand, understands that trading for absolute returns and not
from blind adherence to benchmarks is the best way to handle uncertainty. The concept
of indexing and benchmarking is very useful in the EMT world of traditional, long-only,
passive investing, but it has almost zero usefulness for an absolute return process. Again, it
gets back to what it takes to achieve an absolute return. You need an enormous amount
of latitude and freedom in executing a trading strategy to ensure capital preservation and
achieve a positive return. At its core, the concept of absolute return
investing is antithetical to benchmarking, which encourages traditional managers to have
similarly structured portfolios and look at their performance on a relative basis. If you
base your trading strategy on benchmark comparisons, it doesn't matter whether you are a talented
trader or not, because all decisions are about the averages. Why is any trading skill relevant?
It's not. That's why 80% of mutual funds don't beat averages. Volatility versus risk.
There are organizations that rank and track monthly performance numbers. One organization
gives a star ranking, like Morningstar. The quantitative rating system employed ranks
and rates the performance of all commodity trading advisors, CTA. Ratings are given in
four categories, A, equity, B, performance, C, risk exposure, and D, risk-adjusted returns.
In each category, the highest possible rating is five stars and the lowest possible rating
is one star. The actual statistics on which the percentiles are based as follows. One,
performance, rate of return. Two, risk, standard deviation. Three, risk-adjusted, sharp ratio.
Four, equity, assets. Dunn Capital once received one star for risk,
the implication being that an investment with Dunn is more risky. However, these rankings
don't give accurate information on Dunn's true risk. This rating group uses standard
deviation as their measure of risk, but this is a measure of volatility and not necessarily
risk. High volatility alone does not necessarily mean higher risk. It's doubtful Dunn, with
a track record exceeding 40 years, is overly concerned about being inaccurately penalized,
but using standard deviation as a risk measurement does distort a true understanding. This same
firm's ranking of then active trader Victor Niederhofer demonstrates the star system's
weakness. At the time of Niederhofer's public trading
demise in 1997, he was rated as four stars for risk. Based on Niederhofer's past performance,
the rankings were saying he was a much safer bet than Dunn. Obviously, the star system failed
for people who believed Niederhofer was less risky. Standard deviation as a risk measure
does trend following an injustice. One of my goals is to dispel the simplistic notion
trend following is risky or that all trend following strategies have high standard deviations,
which means they are bad. A good illustration begins with this 10-year
chart of various trend following performances, see table 3.1a and b in the supplemental
PDF. Just saying a trader is volatile and thus bad makes little sense if you examine
absolute return performance, table 3.1. Raw absolute returns should count for something
far more than fear or career risk. They equal the only way to massive wealth. Nonetheless,
volatility, what standard deviation measures, is still a pejorative for most market participants.
Volatility scares them. Even when a young student can quickly analyze any historical
data series to see volatility is normal and expected. But most investors try to run
away from the hint of volatility, even when running is not possible. Some markets and
traders are more volatile than others, but degrees of volatility are basic facts of life.
To trend following, volatility is the precursor to profit. If you have no volatility, you have
no opportunity for profit. The press is always confused as seen in business
week. Trend followers are trying to make sense out of their dismal recent returns.
When you look past the superficial question of how we did, you look under the hood and
see immense change in the global markets, says John W. Henry's president. Volatility
is just a harbinger of new trends to come. Maybe, but futures traders are supposed to
make money by exploiting volatility. Performance isn't a superficial question if you are among the
thousands of commodity-fund customers who lost money when the currency markets went bonkers.
Focusing on one period in isolation, while ignoring a complete performance history,
misrepresents the full picture. I wondered if this reporter had written a follow-up article
correcting his observations about trend following, because the following year, trend trader Don
produced a 60.25% return, and trend trader Parker produced a 61.82% return.
It didn't surprise me. Business week archives revealed no correction.
Volatility. Hedge fund researcher,
Nicola Meaden, compared monthly standard deviations, volatility as measured from the mean,
and semi-standard deviations, volatility measured on the downside only, and found that although trend
following arguably experiences higher volatility, it is often concentrated on the upside,
positive returns, not the downside, negative returns. Trend following performance is thus
unfairly penalized by performance measures such as the Sharpe ratio. The Sharpe ratio ignores
whether volatility is on the plus or minus side, because it does not account for the difference
between the standard deviation and the semi-standard deviation. The actual formula is identical,
with one exception. The semi-standard deviation looks only at observations below the mean.
If the semi-standard deviation is lower than the standard deviation,
the historical pull-away from the mean has to be on the plus side. If it is higher,
the pull-away from the mean is on the minus side. Meaden points out the huge difference that
puts trend following volatility on the upside if you compare monthly standard, 12.51,
and semi-standard, 5.79, deviation. Here is another way of thinking about upside volatility.
Ponder a market going up. You enter at $100 and the market goes to $150. Then the market drops
to $125. Is that necessarily bad? No, because after going from $100 to $150 and then dropping
back to $125, the market might then zoom up to $175. This is upside volatility in action.
Even Harry Markowitz, see Podcast Episode No. 235, who won the Nobel Prize for his
mean variance theory, has noted semi-variance is a better risk measure. He has even said he might
not have won that Nobel Prize if he built CAPM around semi-variance. Quite simply, trend following
has greater upside volatility and less downside volatility than traditional equity indices
because it exits losing trades quickly. Trend trader Graham Capital mitigates the fear.
A trend follower achieves positive returns by correctly targeting market direction and
minimizing the cost of his portfolio. Thus, while trend following is sometimes referred to as being
long volatility, trend followers technically do not trade volatility, although they often benefit
from it. The question then is not how to reduce volatility—you can't control the market after
all—but how to manage it through proper position sizing or money management. You have
to get used to riding the bucking bronco. Great trend traders don't see straight-up
equity curves in their accounts, so you are in good company when it comes to the up-and-down
nature of making money. John W. Henry sees the distinction. Risk is very different from
volatility—a lot of people believe there is no difference, but there's a huge difference,
and I can spend an hour on that topic. Suffice it to say that we embrace both volatility and
risk, and for us, risk is that we're going to lose if we risk two-tenths of one percent
on a particular trade. That is, to us, real risk. Giving back a profit to you probably seems like
risk. To us, it seems like volatility. Henry's worldview didn't avoid high volatility.
The last thing he wanted to experience is volatility that forced him out of a major
trend before he could make a profit. Dinesh Desai, a trend follower from the 1980s,
was fond of saying he loved volatility. Being on the right side of a volatile market was the
reason he retired rich. Even with predictable and ongoing volatility debates, trend-following
has one of the longest-standing track records in the hedge fund industry and has consistently
demonstrated its diversifying power. The ability to take short positions objectively
is absolutely crucial. As a strategy with a relatively low Sharpe ratio, it needs to be
well understood by investors, so the size of positions is in line with their particular
risk tolerance. However, the skeptics and critics always view high volatility as only bad.
For example, a fund manager with $1.5 billion in assets remains on the sidelines,
refusing to believe in trend-following. My biggest source of hesitancy about the asset class,
trend-following, is its reliance on technical analysis. Trading advisors do seem to profit,
but because they rarely incorporate economic data, they simply ride price trends until
they reverse. The end result of this crude approach is a subpar return-to-risk ratio.
Another money manager opines, why should I give money to a double-A baseball player when I can
hire someone in the major leagues? Looking at the absolute performance of great trend traders
and calling it double-A baseball makes little objective sense. I doubt this guy made it past
October 2008 unless he was bailed out. Of course, the funds and banks that all blew out then were
all considered major league, but if you can get beyond the volatility as the devil propaganda,
it's easy to see how you can benefit from volatility. Trend follower Jason Russell says it well.
Volatility matters when you feel it. All the charts, ratios, and advanced math in the world
mean nothing when you break down, vomit, or cry due to the volatility in your portfolio.
I call this the Vomitility Threshold. Understanding your threshold is important,
for it is at this point that you lose all confidence and throw in the towel.
Traders, portfolio managers, and mathematicians seem well equipped to describe risk with a battery
of formulas and ratios they use to measure volatility. However, even if you can easily
handle the math, it can be a challenge to truly conceptualize it. I can sum it up as follows.
Surrender to the reality that volatility exists or volatility will introduce you to
the reality that surrender exists. Building on Russell's point, David Harding
was asked, You've attracted quite a lot of new money into the fund since you've launched,
but particularly in the last couple of years. Why? Harding replied,
The market has bought what actually is quite a complicated story. Our story is not simple.
In our early years we were impeded by the terrific performance of dot-com stocks.
Later people became very attracted to certain types of hedge funds, which produced very smooth and
steady returns, something which we've never purported to do. But now that the story has
been got across better, people are, I think, realizing that we are a good horse to back in
the race. Drawdowns
With trend following, however, comes the inevitable drawdown. A drawdown is any losing period during
an investment record. It is defined as the percent retrenchment from an equity peak to an equity
valley. A drawdown is in effect from the time an equity retrenchment begins until a new equity
high is reached. That is, in terms of time, a drawdown encompasses both the period from
equity peak to equity valley, length, and the time from the equity valley to a new equity high,
recovery. For example, if you start with $100,000 and drop to $50,000, you are in a 50 percent
drawdown. You could also say you have lost 50 percent. The drawdown is thus a reduction
in your account equity. Yes, that happens for buy and holders, too, but the big difference
is that trend following has an exit strategy built in. Not surprisingly, many investors
and regulators have made drawdown for trend following a dirty word while leaving mutual
funds free to disguise their true drawdowns. Dunn Capitals Retort
Investors should be aware the volatility inherent to our trading programs.
Because the same portfolio risk profile is intrinsic to all programs, investors in any
program can be expected to experience volatility similar to our composite record. During 40-plus
years of trading, the composite record on a month-to-month basis has experienced eight
serious losses exceeding 25 percent. The eighth such loss equaled 40 percent, beginning in
September 1999 and extending through September 2000. This loss was recovered in the three-month
period ending in December 2000. The most serious loss in our entire history occurred over a
four-month period, which ended in February 1976 and equaled 52 percent. Dunn did have a 57 percent
drawdown in 2007, which it recovered from and made new highs as recently as July 2016.
Clients should be prepared to endure similar or worse periods in the future.
The inability or unwillingness to do so will probably result in serious loss
without the opportunity for subsequent recovery.
Unless you understand Dunn's philosophy, you might refuse to invest,
even though that 40-year-plus track record is the envy of Monday morning quarterbacks.
Examine their drawdown history in Figure 3.1 in the included supplemental PDF.
I use this same chart in Chapter 2 to illustrate performance, but it serves another purpose.
Imagine the valleys between the peaks are filled with water. First, place a piece of paper over
the chart and then slowly move the paper to the right and uncover the chart. Imagine you
have made a large investment in the fund. How do you feel as you move the page? How
long can you remain underwater? How deep can you dive? Do you pull out the calculator and figure
out what you could have earned at the bank? Do you figure out you lost enough to buy a vacation,
car, house, or perhaps solve the hunger crisis of a small nation?
To the eyes-wide open player, this drawdown chart, Figure 3.1, is tolerable because of
the absolute returns over the long term, but that doesn't make it easy to accept.
An accurate discussion of drawdown inevitably leads to the recovery conversation,
which means bringing capital back to the point where a drawdown began.
Historically, trend following has quickly made money back during recovery from drawdowns.
However, you can't neglect the math associated with losing money and making it back.
What if you start with $100 and it drops to $50? You are now in a 50% drawdown.
How much do you have to make to get back to break even? Table 3.2 in the included PDF.
You need 100% to get back. That's right. When you go down 50%, you need to make back 100%
to get back to break even. Notice as drawdown increases. See Table 3.2 in the included PDF.
The percent gain necessary to recover to the break even point increases at a much faster rate.
Trend following strategy lives with this chart daily. It handles the math.
Table 3.2 drawdown recovery chart. Size of drawdown, 5%. Percent gain to recover, 5.3%.
Drawdown, 10%. Recover, 11.1%. Drawdown, 15%. Recover, 17.6%.
Drawdown, 20%. Recover, 25%. Drawdown, 25%. Recover, 33.3%.
Drawdown, 30%. Recover, 42.9%. Drawdown, 40%. Recover, 66.7%.
Drawdown, 50%. Recover, 100%. Drawdown, 60%.
Recover, 150%. Drawdown, 70%. Recover, 233%. Drawdown, 80%. Recover, 400%.
Drawdown, 90%. Recover, 900%. Size of drawdown, 100%. Percent gain to recover, ruin.
1. David Harding goes after drawdown haters. A key measure of track record quality and
strategy riskiness in the managed futures industry is drawdown, which measures the
decline in net asset value from the historic high point. Under the Commodity Futures Trading
Commission's mandatory disclosure regime, managed futures advisors are obliged to disclose as part
of their capsule performance record their worst peak to value drawdown. As a description of an
aspect of historical performance, drawdown has one key positive attribute. It refers to a physical
reality and as such it is less abstract than concepts such as volatility. It represents the
amount by which you are less well off than you were or, put differently, it measures the magnitude
of the loss an investor could have incurred by investing with the manager in the past.
Managers are obliged to wear their worst historical drawdown like a scarlet letter
for the rest of their lives. If the complete story of an absolute return trading strategy
is understood, drawdown fear is mitigated. However, you can't eliminate catastrophic risk,
much less drawdowns from trading. A great example of getting scared at the wrong time
during a drawdown can be seen in this trader's story. I once opened an account for a client.
At the time we were down ten to twelve percent, and I explained the drawdown and our expectation
for losses. Suddenly, when his account went down twenty percent, he became very anxious.
He eventually closed his account. He made the business decision to stop trading because of
the pain he was feeling from the drawdown. I continued to track his account hypothetically,
so I could see what would happen if he would have continued trading. He added,
as it turns out, he closed his account within two days of the drawdown low. Had he stayed invested,
he would be up 121.1 percent from his closing value and 71.6 percent from his starting value
through October 2008. I am reminded of a statement quoted many times from Peter Lynch, the manager
of the Fidelity Magellan Fund. In light of Lynch's trading success, he revealed over fifty percent of
the investors in his fund lost money. He explained the reason. Most investors pulled out at the wrong
time. They traded with their gut and treated drawdowns as a cancer, rather than the natural
ebb and flow of trading. Interestingly, there is another perspective on drawdowns that few consider.
When you look at trend-following performance data, for example Dunn's track record,
you can't help but notice certain times look better than others to invest. Some clients do
look at that performance chart and buy when the fund is experiencing a drawdown.
Because if Dunn is down thirty percent and you know from analysis of past performance data that
recovery from drawdowns can be quick, then buying while on sale is an option. This is commonly
referred to as equity curve trading. Trend trader Tom Basso. I haven't met a trader yet
that wouldn't say privately that he would tend to buy his program on a drawdown,
particularly systematic traders, but investors seem to not add money when, to traders, it seems to be
most logical to do so. Why don't investors invest on drawdowns? I believe the answer to that question
lies in the investing psychology of buying a drawdown. The human mind can easily extrapolate
three months of negative returns into how long at this rate will it take to lose fifty percent or
everything. Rather than seeing the bargain and the positive return to risk, they see only the
negative and forecast more of the same into the future. Not only do some trend-followers
tell clients to buy into their funds during a drawdown, they also buy into their own funds
during the drawdowns. I know employees at top trend-following funds who are too happy when
they are in a drawdown because they can buy their fund cheap. Other trading styles have
drawdowns too. For example, some of the best names on Wall Street, non-trend-followers,
had tough sledding in 2008, but they don't have the drawdown stigma associated with trend-following.
Warren Buffett, Berkshire Hathaway, negative 43 percent. Ken Huebner, CMG Focus Fund,
negative 56 percent. Harry Lang, Fidelity Magellan, negative 59 percent. Bill Miller,
Leg Mason Value Trust, negative 50 percent. Ken Griffin, Citadel, negative 44 percent.
Carl Eiken, Eiken Enterprises, negative 81 percent. T. Boone Pickens, down $2 billion
since July 2008. Kirk Kirkorian, down $693 million on Ford shares alone.
It is paramount to determine how quickly you can recover from a drawdown and get back to
making new money again, regardless of trading strategy. Correlation. Correlation comparisons
help to show trend-following as a legitimate style and demonstrate the similarity and strategy used
among trend-followers. Correlation is not only important in assembling the portfolio you trade,
but it is also a critical tool for analyzing and comparing the performance histories of
trend-followers. In a research paper titled, Learning to Love Non-Correlation, correlation
is defined as a statistical term giving the strength of linear relationship between two
random variables. It is the historical tendency of one thing to move in tandem with another.
The correlation coefficient is a number from negative one to positive one, with negative
one being the perfectly opposite behavior of two investments. For example, up 5 percent every
time the other is down 5 percent. The plus one reflects identical investment results,
up or down the same amount each period. The further away from plus one one gets,
and thus closer to negative one, the better a diversifier one investment is for the other.
But, to keep things simple, another description of correlation is instructive.
The tendency for one investment to zig while another zags.
Let's look at an example. I took the monthly performance numbers of trend-followers and
computed their correlation coefficients. Comparing correlations gave the evidence
that trend-followers trade typically the same markets in the same way at the same time.
Look at the correlation chart, see Table 3.3a in the supplemental PDF, and ask yourself,
why do two trend-followers who don't work in the same office,
who are on opposite sides of the continent, have the same three losing months in a row
with similar percentage losses? Then ask, why do they have the same winning month,
then the same two losing months, and then the same three winning months in a row?
The relationship is there because they can respond only to what the market offers.
The market offers trends to everyone equally. They're all looking at the same market,
aiming for the same target of opportunity. Table 3.3b in the supplemental PDF also shows
trend-followers using similar techniques. Interestingly, correlation can be a touchy
subject. The turtles were all grateful to Richard Dennis for his mentoring, but some were
ambivalent over time, obviously indebted to Dennis, but struggling to achieve their own identity.
One turtle says his system is 95% Dennis' system, and the rest his own flair. I'm a long way from
someone who follows the system mechanically, but by far, the structure of what I do is based on
Richard's systems, and certainly philosophically, everything I do in terms of trading is based on
what I learned from Richard. Even when correlation data shows similar patterns among Dennis' turtle
students, the desire to differentiate is stronger than their need to honestly address
obvious similarities in their return streams. There no longer is a turtle trading style in my
mind. We've all evolved and developed systems that are very different from those we were taught,
and that independent evolution suggests that the dissimilarities to trading between turtles are
always increasing. A turtle correlation chart paints another picture. The relationship is there
to judge. The data, Table 3.4 and the supplemental PDF, is the ultimate arbiter. There is more to the
story than correlation, however. Although correlations show turtles trade in a similar way, their returns
differ due to their individual leverage and portfolio choices. Some traders use more leverage,
others less. Turtle trader Jerry Parker explains,
The bigger the trade, the greater the returns, and the greater the drawdowns. It's a double-edged
sword. Zero Sum. The zero-sum nature of many markets is arguably the most important concept
in markets. Larry Harris, Chair in Finance at the Marshall School of Business at University
of Southern California. Trading is a zero-sum game when gains and losses are measured relative to
the market average. In a zero-sum game, someone can win only if somebody else loses.
Harris told me he was amazed at how many people came from my websites to download his white paper
on zero-sum trading. The topic left out of most strategy discussions. It's one winner and one
loser. Harris examines the factors that determine who wins and who loses in market transactions.
He does this by categorizing traders by type and then evaluating speculative trading styles
to determine whether the styles lead to profits or losses. Winning traders can only profit to the
extent that other traders are willing to lose. Traders are willing to lose when they obtain
external benefits from trading. The most important external benefits are expected returns from holding
risky securities that represent deferred consumption. Hedging and gambling provide
other external benefits. Markets would not exist without utilitarian traders.
Their trading losses fund the winning traders who make prices efficient and provide liquidity.
There are those who absolutely do not accept that there must be a loser for them to be a winner.
They cannot live with the fact everyone can't be a winner. Although they want to win,
many do not want to live with the guilt by their winning someone else has to lose.
This is a poorly thought out yet all too common view of the losing trader's mindset.
Harris is clear on what separates winners from losers. On any given transaction the chances of
winning or losing may be near even. In the long run, however, winners profit from trading
because they have some persistent advantages that allow them to win slightly more often
or occasionally much bigger than losers win. To trade profitably in the long run,
you must know your edge, you must know when it exists, and you must focus your trading to
exploit it when you can. If you have no edge, you should not trade for profit. If you know
you have no edge, but you must trade for other reasons, you should organize your trading to
minimize your losses to those who do have an edge. Recognizing your edge is a prerequisite to
predicting whether trading will be profitable. Nobel Prize winner and co-founder of famed
trend-following incubator Commodities Corporation, Paul Samuelson adds,
For every trader betting on higher prices, another is betting on lower prices. These trades are
matched, and the stock market all investors, buyers, and sellers can profit in a rising market,
and all can lose in a falling market. In futures markets, one trader's gain is another's loss.
Dennis Gartman adds to the perspective, In the world of futures speculation,
for every long there is an equal and opposite short. That is, unlike the world of equity trading
where there needn't be equal numbers of longs versus shorts, in the world of futures dealing
there is. Money is neither made nor lost in futures. It is simply moved from one pocket
to the next as margins are swapped at the close of trading each day. Thus, every time there is
a buyer betting that prices shall rise in the future, there is an equal seller taking the very
opposite bet, betting that prices will fall. These observations will save your skin if you
are willing to accept the truth, but as you can see throughout this volume, many are either
ignorant to zero-sum thinking, choose to ignore it, or refuse to believe it, condemned to exist
inside biases. George Soros
The trading success of famed speculator George Soros is well known. In 1992 he was labeled the
man who broke the British pound for placing a $10 billion bet against the pound that netted him
at least $1 billion in profit. Yet even successful pros sometimes miss a key point.
Years back, Soros appeared on Nightline, an old-school ABC news program.
This exchange between Soros and then host Ted Koppel goes to the zero-sum understanding,
or lack thereof. Ted Koppel
As you describe it, the market is, of course, a game in which there are real consequences.
When you bet and you win, that's good for you. It's bad for those against whom you have bet.
There are always losers in this kind of game.
George Soros
No, see, it's not a zero-sum game. It's very important to realize.
Ted Koppel
Well, it's not zero-sum in terms of investors. But, for example,
when you bet against the British pound, that was not good for the British economy.
George Soros
Well, it happened to be quite good for the British economy. It was not, let's say,
good for the British treasury because they were on the other side of the trade.
It's not, your gain is not necessarily somebody else's loss.
Ted Koppel
Because, put it in easily understandable terms, I mean, if you could have profited
by destroying Malaysia's currency, would you have shrunk from that?
George Soros
Not necessarily because that would have been an unintended consequence of my action.
It's not my job as a participant to calculate the consequences. This is what a market is.
That's the nature of a market, so I'm a participant in the market.
Soros opens a can of worms with his description of zero-sum.
From a blog post that incorrectly analyzes Soros's interview, cosmetically Koppel wipes the floor
with Soros. He's able to portray Soros as a person who destroys lives and economies without
a second thought, as well as simplify beyond belief something that should not be simplified.
This is nonsense. The fact Soros is a player in the market does not establish him as a destroyer
of lives. You might disagree with Soros's political ideology, but you can't question his
morality for participation in markets. You have a 401k plan designed to generate profits from the
markets, like Soros. Others, such as Lawrence Parks, a union activist, correctly state that Soros
is in a zero-sum game, but Parks then goes jealous by declaring zero-sum unfair and harsh
for the working man. Since currency and derivative trading are zero-sum games,
every dollar won requires that a dollar was lost. Haven't they realized what a losing
proposition this has been? What's more, why did they keep playing at a losing game?
The answer is that the losers are all of us. And while neither rich nor stupid,
we've been given no choice but to continue to lose. And every time one of these fat
currencies cannot be defended, the workers, seniors, and business owners of that country,
folks like us, suffer big time. Indeed, as their currencies are devalued,
workers' savings and future payments, such as their pensions,
denominated in those currencies lose purchasing power. Interest rates increase. Through no fault
of their own, working people lose their jobs in addition to their savings. There have been press
reports that, after a lifetime of working and saving, people in Indonesia are eating
bark off the trees and boiling grass soup. While not a secret, it is astonishing to learn
how sanguine the beneficiaries have become of their advantage over the rest of us.
For example, famed financier George Soros and his recent The Crisis of Global Capitalism
plainly divulges, The Bank of England was on the other side of my transactions,
and I was taking money out of the pockets of British taxpayers.
To me, the results of this wealth transfer are inescapable.
Parks says his only choice is to lose. He loses. His union loses. It's a pity party.
It seems everyone loses in the Zero Sum game, even though Parks' fund will,
of course, have their assets invested in the very funds he criticizes.
Look, there are winners and losers, and he knows that. Yes, the Zero Sum speculation
game is, indeed, a wealth transfer. The winners profit from the losers. Life is not fair.
If you don't like being a loser in the Zero Sum game,
then it is time to consider how the winners play the game.
Trying to understand Soros' reasons for denying Zero Sum would be speculation on my part.
Soros is not always the Zero Sum winner, either. He was on the losing side of the
Zero Sum game during the long-term capital management fiasco in 1998,
in which he lost $2 billion. He also had severe trouble in the 2000 technology meltdown.
With bets that went sour on technology stocks and on Europe's new currency,
the five funds run by Soros Fund Management have suffered a 20% decline this year and,
at $14.4 billion, are down roughly a third from a peak of $22 billion in August 1998.
These wins and losses took a toll on Soros. Maybe I don't understand the market. Maybe the
music is stopped, but people are still dancing. I am anxious to reduce my market exposure and
be more conservative. We will accept lower returns because we will cut the risk profile.
Don't blame Zero Sum
Long-time Federal Judge Milton Pollock's ruling that dismissed class-action suits illustrates
Zero Sum confusion. He minces no words in warning whiners about the game they are playing.
Seeking to lay the blame for the enormous internet bubble solely at the feet of a single actor,
Merrill Lynch, plaintiffs would have this court conclude that the Federal Security's laws were
meant to underwrite, subsidize, and encourage their rash speculation in joining a freewheeling
casino that lured thousands obsessed with the fantasy of Olympian riches, but which delivered
such riches to only a scant handful of lucky winners. Those few lucky winners, who are not
before the court, now hold the monies that the unlucky plaintiffs have lost fair and square,
and they will never return those monies to plaintiffs. Had plaintiffs themselves won the
game instead of losing, they would have owed not a single penny of their winnings to those they
left to hold the bag or to the defendants. A 96-year-old judge bluntly telling plaintiffs
to take responsibility for their own actions was no doubt painful for those seeking an
incompetence bailout. Pollock flatly nails the losers for trying to circumvent the Zero Sum
market process via the judicial process. The harsh reality of speculation is you
only have yourself to blame for decisions you make with your money.
You can make ongoing losing or winning decisions. It's your choice.
David Druze, a long-time trend follower, takes Judge Pollock's ruling a step further,
spelling out the practical effects. Everyone who enters the market thinks they will win,
but obviously there are losers as well. Somebody has to be losing to you if you are winning,
so we always like to stress that you should know from whom you're going to take profits,
because if you're buying, the guy that's selling thinks he's going to be right, too.
The market is a brutal place. Forget trying to be liked. Need a friend? Get a dog.
The market doesn't know you and never will. If you are going to win, someone else has to lose.
If you don't like these survival of the fittest rules, then stay out of the Zero Sum game.
Amidst the recent celebration of Berkshire Hathaway's 50 years of investment returns,
trend following trader Bernard Drury and his firm Drury Capital wondered if a portfolio holding
Berkshire, BRKA, already hugely successful, could nonetheless be improved by combining holdings of
BRKA with other assets. An ideal candidate for investment alongside BRKA would be an asset with
both positive returns on a stand-alone basis as well as low correlation to BRKA.
In 1983, Dr. John Linter published the classic paper The Potential Role of Managed Commodity
Financial Futures Accounts and or Funds in Portfolios of Stocks and Bonds. In this study,
he pointed to gains in risk-adjusted rates of return that potentially could be obtained by
combining equity investment with managed futures. To examine a portfolio combination of stocks and
managed futures, read trend following, Drury focused on Berkshire because of its legendary
performance. On the managed futures side, Drury's trend following fund satisfies the
requirements of having both strong performance and almost zero correlation to Berkshire.
While Drury cannot cite the same longevity as Berkshire, it has been in continuous operation
for almost 19 years. At least for these years, it is useful to examine Drury in
relation to Berkshire for a possible improvement of overall portfolio returns.
The two performance records, taken individually during this period, are broadly similar.
Table 3.5, May 1997 to February 2015. Drury and BRKA.
Rate of return. Drury, 11.3%. BRKA, 10.4%. 50% Drury, 50% BRKA.
10.9%. Standard deviation. Drury, 20%. BRKA, 20.6%. 50% Drury, 50% BRKA. 14.4%.
Drawdown. Drury, 32.5%. BRKA, 44.5%. 50% Drury, 50% BRKA, 23.9%. Rate of return
divided by drawdown. Drury, 0.35%. BRKA, 0.23%. 50% Drury, 50% BRKA, 0.5%.
Rate of return divided by volume. Drury, 0.57%. BRKA, 0.5%. 50% Drury, 50% BRKA, 0.83%.
The correlation between the two return streams is 0.01. Despite the overall similarity of returns,
the paths to producing these returns have nothing in common. Consequently, as modern portfolio
theory would predict, the performance of a portfolio holding Berkshire is potentially improved by adding
a non-correlated Drury. It is, of course, equally true a portfolio holding only Drury
is potentially improved by being coupled with a non-correlated asset such as Berkshire.
A look at the efficient frontier for this two-asset portfolio suggests a blend of approximately 50-50
would have produced the highest ratio of rate of return versus standard deviation of returns.
The portfolio with 50% each in Berkshire and Drury raised the risk-adjusted rate of return
to a level higher than either could achieve individually. For the holder of Berkshire,
the diversification reduced the portfolio volatility by almost one-third
and reduced the depth of the peak-to-trough drawdown by almost half.
Finally, and perhaps even remarkably, the combination of Berkshire holdings with this
non-correlated asset cut the length of the drawdown associated with holding Berkshire alone
by a whopping 43 months. This means instead of experiencing a 61-month period,
December 2007 to January 2013 underwater, relative to the latest high price while holding Berkshire
shares alone, the combined portfolio reduced the underwater period to only 18 months.
By the same token, of course, the underwater period of holding Drury alone is reduced from
55 months to the same 18 months. Table 3.6, May 1997 to February 2015 drawdown,
December 2007 to January 2013 drawdown, Drury, 32.5%. BRKA, 44.5%.
50% Drury, 50% BRKA, 23.9%. Peak-to-trough, months. Drury, 32. BRKA, 14.
50% Drury, 50% BRKA, 10. Troft-to-peak, months. Drury, 23. BRKA, 47.
50% Drury, 50% BRKA, 8. Total, months. Drury, 55. BRKA, 61. 50% Drury, 50% BRKA, 18.
Columbia University professor Benjamin Graham led academia and Wall Street with pioneering
work across value investing. Famously, Warren Buffett was one of his students in the 1940s,
and years later, the Nobel Prize-winning work of Harry Markowitz explored the effects
of combining non-correlated assets to improve risk-adjusted returns. Markowitz is credited with
the often repeated quip that, diversification is the only free lunch in finance. Thus,
it's not surprising that adding Drury's trend following as diversification to Buffett and
Berkshire clearly enhances an overall portfolio return while reducing volatility. Ultimately,
performance data is the driver, the only truth we can take in for analysis.
If there is no data, no believable narrative can be used to explain anything.
And trend following data is a very clever way to illustrate human behavior with numbers,
and it happens to also be proof of concept any skeptic would want before jumping into the deep
end to deploy their risk capital. Yet where does trend following performance data come from exactly?
Summary food for thought. F.U. money.
If you trade for absolute returns, you have the chance for F.U. money, the money it would take
to leave your job and never work again. You and Kirk. When people ask, what do you
think is going to happen in the future, we always say, we don't know. We can't really project whether
next year will be a good year or a bad year. Absolute return means trying to make the most
possible. In a zero-sum game, the total gains of the winners are exactly equal to the total
losses of the losers. George Crapple. So while it may be a zero-sum game,
a lot of people don't care. It's not that they're stupid. It's not speculative frenzy.
They're just using the markets for a completely different purpose, hedging.
The U.S. Army War College introduced the acronym V.U.C.A. to describe general conditions post-Cold
War. Volatile, uncertain, complex, and ambiguous. Mark Rezebsinski. If a manager cannot explain
what he does and his edge in 45 minutes, you should not invest.
Bernard Drury graciously contributed for this section.
Percentage change in stock price month over month as of each month
end across the period covered. BRKA stock prices from Yahoo Finance.
Note. You can review trend-following performance going back decades.
Send an email for online sources www.trendfollowing.com slash contact.


# Chapter 10

These are the side-margin quotations for Chapter III.
It is a capital mistake to theorize before one has data.
Sir Arthur Conan Doyle.
This ain't clipping coupons, no risk, no return, no balls, no babies.
Anonymous.
The class of those who have the ability to think their own thoughts is separated by
an unbridgeable gulf from the class of those who cannot.
Ludwig von Mises.
Volatility is the tendency for prices to change unexpectedly.
Some suggested a few years ago that trend following had been marginalized.
The answer is we haven't been marginalized.
Trend following has played a key role in helping protect a lot of people's wealth this year.
Mark Rezebsinski.
Trading is a zero-sum game in an important accounting sense.
In a zero-sum game, the total gains of the winners are exactly equal to the total losses
of the losers, Larry Harris.
Some people seem to like to lose, so they win by losing money.
Ed Seacota.
If you were to put all the trend following models side by side, you would probably find
that most made profits and incurred losses in the same markets.
They were all looking at the same charts and obtaining the same perception of opportunity.
Mark Goodman.
Kenmar Asset Allocation.
Some capital management's documents include a summary of serious past losses.
The summary explains that the firm has suffered through seven difficult periods of losses
of 25% or more.
Every potential investor receives a copy.
If the investor is not willing to live through this, they are not the right investor for
the portfolio.
Obviously, you don't want to overhaul a program in response to one year just because
something didn't work.
That's when you're almost guaranteed that it would have worked the next year had you
kept it in there.
Eclipse Capital.
The 25 or 50 biggest trend followers are essentially going to make money in the same places.
What differentiates them from one another are portfolio and risk management.
Unless you can watch your stock holding decline by 50% without becoming panic-stricken,
you should not be in the stock market.
Warren Buffett.
Note.
Since 1980, Berkshire Hathaway has had drawdowns of negative 51%, negative 49%, negative 37%
and negative 37%.
In addition, Charles Munger Partnership dropped negative 31.9% in 1973 and negative 31.5%
in 1974.
We have not made any changes because of a drawdown.
While we have made minor changes since the program started trading in 1974, over the
course of the years the basic concepts have never changed.
The majority of the trading parameters and the buy and sell signals largely have remained
the same.
Bill Dunn.
You have to keep trading the way you were before the drawdown and also be patient.
There's always part of a trader's psyche that wants to make losses back tomorrow.
But traders need to remember you lose it really fast, but you make it up slowly.
You may think you can make it up fast, but it doesn't work that way.
David Drews.
Correlation coefficient.
A statistical measure of the interdependence of two or more random variables.
Fundamentally, the value indicates how much of a change in one variable is explained by
a change in another.
Campbell & Company, a trend following managed futures firm with almost billions in assets
under management, has returned 17.65% since its inception in 1972, proving that performance
can be sustainable over the long term.
If an investor had invested 10% of his or her portfolio in the Milburn diversified portfolio
from February 1977 through August 2003, he or she would have increased the return on
his or her traditional portfolio by 73 basis points, a 6.2% increase, and decreased risk,
as measured by standard deviation, by 0.26% of a percent, an 8.2% decrease.
Milburn Corporation.
When I was young, I thought that money was the most important thing in life.
Now that I am old, I know that it is.
Oscar Wilde.
If they can get you asking the wrong questions, they don't have to worry about answers.
Thomas Pynchon.
The winners and losers of the ZeroSum game.
The origins of trading profits, price efficiency, and market liquidity.
See http://turtletrader.com slash zerosum.pdf.
I was talking to myself saying like, just relax man, the comeback is so great already.
Let it fly off your racket and just see what happens.
I think that's the mindset I got to have as well in the finals.
Sort of a nothing to lose mentality.
It's been nice these last six matches to have that mentality.
It worked very well, so I'll keep that up.
Roger Federer.
On pep talk he gave himself in the fifth set of his 18th Grand Slam win.
What objectivity and the study of philosophy requires is not an open mind, but an active
mind.
It's a mind able and eagerly willing to examine ideas, but to examine them critically.
Ayn Rand.
It's all a matter of perspective.
What some consider a catastrophic flood, others deem a cleansing bath.
Gregory J. Millman.
If all it took to beat the markets was a PhD in mathematics, there'd be a hell of a lot
of rich mathematicians out there.
Bill Drys.
If you have sound philosophy and superior strategy, the day-to-day slows down.
If you don't have such, every distraction appears consequential.
Michael Covell.
Valiant is like I.T.T. and Harold Janine come back to life.
Only the guy is worse this time.
Valiant of course was a sewer.
Charlie Munger.
2015-2016.
There are no facts about the future, just opinions.
Anyone who asserts with conviction what he thinks will happen in the macro future is
overstating his foresight, whether out of ignorance, hubris, or dishonesty.
Howard Marks.


# Chapter 11

Chapter 4 Big Events, Crashes, and Panics
Of all the beliefs on Wall Street, price momentum makes efficient market theorists howl the
loudest. James O'Shaughnessy
Rare events are always unexpected, otherwise they would not occur.
Nassim Taleb
Remember the Gomer Pyle character from The Andy Griffith Show? I can see Gomer
saying his classic TV line now. Surprise, surprise, surprise.
To comprehend trendfollowing's true impact, you must look at its performance across the
biggest events, bubbles, and crashes of the last 50 years, where it won huge profits in
the zero-sum game of Surprises. While world governments in Wall Street are notorious for
country wipeouts, central bank errors, corporate collapses, bank implosions, and fund blow-ups
that transfer capital from losers to winners, the winners are almost always missing from
after-the-fact analysis. Like clockwork, the press is over-the-top fascinated with the
losers when surprises roll in. Following their lead, the public also gets
caught up in the loser's drama, oblivious to, Who were the winners and why did they win?
Sometimes they get close to the insight. Each time there's a derivatives disaster, I get
the same question. If Bearings was the loser, who was the winner?
If Orange County was the loser, who was the winner?
If Procter & Gamble was the loser, who was the winner?
Most finance academics searching for winners often come up short, as Christopher Culp of
the University of Chicago lamented. It's a zero-sum game. For every loser, there's
a winner. But you can't always be specific about who the winner is.
When big market events happen, smart people know the loser's losses are going somewhere.
But time passes and they stop thinking about it or forget the original goal.
Reflecting on an implosion is not pleasant. Fear is still in the bones of some pension
fund trustees after Mr. Leeson brought down Bearings Bank. The failure of Bearings Bank
is probably the most often cited derivatives disaster, while the futures market had been
the instrument used by Nick Leeson to play the zero-sum game and someone made a lot
of money being short the Nikkei futures Mr. Leeson was buying.
Everyone did make a lot of money, trading short to Leeson's long. But most of Main
Street and Wall Street look at it through the wrong lens. Michael Mobison sees standard
finance theory coming up short when explaining winners during high-impact times.
One of the major challenges in investing is how to capture or avoid low-probability high-impact
events. Unfortunately, standard finance theory has little to say about the subject.
The unexpected events, so many bemoan, are a source of outsized trend-following profits.
High-impact and unexpected events, the black swans, have made many in this book very wealthy.
One trader explains trend-following success during uncertain times.
For markets to move in tandem, there has to be a common perception or consensus about
economic conditions that drive it. When a major event occurs in the middle of such
a consensus, such as the Russian debt default of August 1998, the terrorist attacks of September
11, 2001, or the corporate accounting scandals of 2002, and the 2008 equity market crash,
it will often accelerate existing trends already in place. Events do not happen in a vacuum.
This is the reason trend-following rarely gets caught on the wrong side of an event. Additionally,
the stop-loss trading style will limit exposure when it does. When this consensus is further
confronted by an event, such as a major country default, the event will reinforce the crisis
mentality already in place and drive those trends toward their final conclusion. Because
trend-following generally can be characterized as having a long option profile, it typically
benefits greatly when these occurrences happen. Said more bluntly, even unlikely events must
come to pass eventually. Therefore, anyone who accepts a small risk of losing everything
will lose everything sooner or later. The ultimate compound return rate is acutely sensitive
to fat tales. However, big events also generate plenty of inane analysis by focusing on
the unanswerable like questions posed by Thomas Ho and Sang Lee, authors of The Oxford Guide to
Financial Modeling. 1. What do these events tell us about our society? 2. Are these financial
losses the dark side of all the benefits of financial derivatives? 3. Should we change
the way we do things? 4. Should society accept these financial losses as part of the survival
of the fittest in the world of business? 5. Should legislation be used to avoid these
events? It is not unusual to see market wins and losses positioned as a morality tale to
be solved by government. This drama absolves the loser's guilt for poor strategies, for
example, Amaranth, Bear Stearns, Bernard Madoff, LTCM, Lehman Brothers, Deutsche Bank, Valiant,
etc. Yet the market is no place for politics or social engineering. No law will ever change
human nature, as Dwight D. Eisenhower noted. The search for a scapegoat is the easiest of
all hunting expeditions. Bottom line, trend following performance histories during the
2016 Brexit event, the 2014-2016 oil implosion, the 2008 market crash, the 2000-2002 dot
com bubble, the 1998 long-term capital management, LTCM crisis, the 1997 Asian contagion, and
the 1995 Bearings Bank and 1993 Metall Giselschaft collapses answer the all-important question,
who won and why? Event 1. Great Recession. The world changed as stock markets crashed
during October 2008. Millions lost trillions of dollars when buy-and-hold tight strategies
imploded. The Dow, S&P, and NASDAQ fell like stones, with the carnage carrying over into
2009. Everyone felt it. Jobs lost, firms going under, and fear all around. No one made money
during this time. Everyone lost. That was the meme. Hold on, is that true?
It is not. There were winners during October 2008, and they made fortunes ranging from
plus 5% to plus 40% in that single month. And trend following strategy was the winner.
First, let me state how it did not win. 1. Trend following did not know stock markets
would crash in October 2008. 2. Trend following did not make money from
only shorting stocks in October 2008. Trend following made money from many different
markets from oil to bonds to currencies to stocks to commodities, markets that trended
up and down. It always does well in times of wild and extended price swings, in part
because systems programmed into computers make calculated emotionless buys and sells. We
are not going to be the first to get in or the first to get out, but we are generally
able to capture 80% of the trends, opined a Superfund associate. For example, consider
performance from January 2008 through October 2008. January, negative 2.21%. February, 14.17%.
March, 1.59%. April, negative 1.23%. May, 6.52%. June, 9.88%. July, negative 10.26%.
August, negative 8.36%. September, 2.59%. October, 17.52%.
This was not the only trend following trader winning big. Consider others during the period.
One fund, run by John W. Henry, was up 72.4% through October 2008. Trans Trend, a Dutch-based
trend following trader managing more than $1 billion in assets, saw one of its funds
go up 71.75% from January through November 2008. Clark Capital Management saw its $72.2
million fund gained 82.2% through October 2008. As but one example of his winning bets,
Clark shorted crude oil when it was around $140 and then stayed with the trade down
to $80 before exiting, thereby collecting the bulk of the trend.
Trend following trader Bernard Drury started selling S&P 500 index futures short in November
2007. The index went down about 36% and the largest jury fund roared up 56.9% through
October 2008. Paul Mulvaney, another trend following trader who has used a much longer
time frame in his trading, weekly bars, saw his fund post a 45.49% return for the
month of October 2008. Yes, in one month.
Another trend follower provided insights into his 2008 performance. October 2008 provides a
prime example of how we can produce gains in volatile and otherwise adverse market conditions.
During this month and preceding months, our trading system not only profited from trends
that were gaining momentum, but also responded to historic volatility by reducing or eliminating
positions and thus risk exposure in markets in which trends were growing stale.
How did they do it? In February 2008, a sustained downward trend
in the US dollar against various currencies accelerated. This coincided with a significant
rally in gold and energy markets. Many trend following trading systems profited from short
positions in the US dollar, see figure 4.1 in the supplemental PDF, and long positions
in gold and energies. They described the unfolding market chaos.
At the same time, several world stocks indices exhibited signs of weakness. By June, however,
gold stumbled nearly $200 from recent highs above $1,000 per ounce, see figure 4.2 in
the supplemental PDF. We were able to continue capturing gains in the US dollar, energies,
and stocks while reducing its long exposure to gold as returns in this market faltered.
They clarified how events led to October 2008. During July and August, profitable trends in
the US dollar, energies, and grains exhausted themselves. It was at this juncture that our
system repositioned itself for results in October, despite short-term drawdowns during
these two months. While speculative traders may have viewed the precipitous drop in
energies and other commodities as an opportunity to add to their long positions, we identified
the end of sustained trends in these markets and significantly reduced its positions and therefore
its risk, particularly in the US dollar. Meanwhile, our system began identifying emerging trends
in world treasury markets, see figure 4.3 in the supplemental PDF, as well as meats
and industrial markets. As October 2008 unfolded, my associate offered
a behind-the-scenes take. Approaching October, we were ready to take advantage of changing market
conditions both because of positions we no longer held as well as positions we had entered during the
subpar return periods of July and August. For example, we had avoided the potential for substantial
losses from an 18.3% decline in gold futures and a 32% collapse in crude oil, see figure 4.4
in the supplemental PDF, by reducing long exposure to these markets before their
substantial October declines. But this is not about predictions, so when trends changed,
the gears switched. After having been short the US dollar for most of the first half of 2008,
by October, we had established positions designed to profit from the reversal of the US dollar
trend in July and August. At that point, currencies such as the British pound began
to decline against the dollar, see figure 4.6 in the supplemental PDF. Trend following
realized the bulk of October profits as a result of the ability to capitalize on different market
conditions while limiting losses based on a combination of diversification, flexibility,
risk management, and discipline. While a substantial portion of trend followings October profits were
derived from short positions in the stock indices and world currencies, trend following
also realized profits from long bond positions. It avoided major losses by reducing exposure
to gold and energies as well. Although not as large as some trend following traders in terms
of assets under management, another trader offered insights into his 2008 performance. He took me
through his trades where he saw monster returns while other market players gasped for air. First,
he outlined a European interest rate trade, see figure 4.7 in the supplemental PDF.
In the midst of the global financial crisis, we received signals on many short-term interest
rates. The Eurobore is a short-term interest rate futures contract traded at the UREX. We
bought on October 7 and are still long through December 2008. Central banks around the globe
began dropping interest rates to ward off equity market declines. Lower interest rates
mean higher Eurobore futures prices. Fundamentals did not drive our decisions. He further explained
how he profited from a short-term interest rate, the Euro Swiss, see figure 4.8 in the
supplemental PDF. The Euro Swiss is another short-term interest rate futures contract.
We entered this position well before the global equity market crash. Consider his explanation about
trading hogs, see figure 4.9 in the supplemental PDF. The hog position was one of the most
beautiful trends that I've seen in years. As the U.S. dollar rallied, nearly every
commodity tied to the dollar moved violently. Although our larger portfolio gains happened
in October, this position profited throughout the fall of 2008. Sure, people love to
focus on stocks, but lumber of all things offered huge gains, see figure 4.10 in the
supplemental PDF. Lumber was another great market over the
fall of 2008. Lumber fell due to the housing crisis in the U.S. Lower demand means lower
lumber prices. We sold the market short in the late summer and held the position until
mid-November. However, it is important to keep in mind that we went short based off
of price action, not fundamentals. For you Starbucks connoisseurs, the coffee
market fall 2008 was another major move, see figure 4.11 in the supplemental PDF. Although
traded in London, Robusta Coffee is denominated in U.S. dollars. The move up in Robusta Coffee
was helped in large part from a strengthening U.S. dollar. A higher dollar means less purchasing
power and other currencies, pushing Robusta lower. My fundamental views once again mean
little. We just followed the trend. Perhaps no other market than the U.S. dollar
was more consequential for trend following. It did not matter whether the strategy made
money in the dollar going long or going short. It was agnostic to direction, see figure
4.12 in the supplemental PDF. The trend up in the U.S. dollar was cut into two segments.
We saw more volatility in this contract than others, simply due to the U.S. equity markets.
Although our entries and exits are tied to highs and lows in the U.S. dollar futures,
moves in the U.S. equity markets influenced the price as well. The rise of this contract
created opportunities in many of the other markets we trade because they are so closely
tied to the price of the dollar. All you can do with trend following is to
take what markets give you. The goal is to make money in whatever market is trending
and not fall in love with one particular market to the exclusion of another, better
market opportunity. Day to Day Analysis
The market crash of 2008 offered fantastic evidence showing trend following as vastly
different than the passive index mindset. Figure 4.13 in the supplemental PDF shows
daily data from trend follower Salem Abraham and lets you see day to day performance differences
between his trend following fund and the S&P. For those who hear about trend trading wins
in October 2008 and immediately want to scream, lucky, look closely at the Abraham data.
It is a great proxy for the other trend following traders as well. Even though gains by the
likes of Abraham and Mulvaney might make logical sense, in hindsight their performance
is not easy to accept for indoctrinated EMT minds. Consider feedback from a reader attempting
to sell his firm on trend following benefits. I have been in discussion with trend following
trader Mulvaney Capital Management since the summer for a company in which I was the COO.
The board thought my ideas were too risky and that I tried to hit too many home runs
by potentially hiring Mulvaney. This particular firm I was with lost $30 million in September
and October 2008. I showed them the Mulvaney performance, $15 million invested in 1999,
equated to $71 million today, and $30 million over the same period equated to $142 million.
After my presentation at a board meeting, I returned to my office and was told that next
week I was being eliminated as I was too big of a risk taker. My only other investment
in my short tenure was with Abraham Trading and the returns equated to nearly positive
12% for the same time period. This was the only positive investment for the organization
over that period. So much for my risk taking. Logically, it is difficult to keep saying trend
following is risky, especially in the face of those risky, leveraged, long-only buy-and-hold
approaches that cratered in 2008. But Wall Street is not logical.
Event 2. Dot-com Bubble
The period from 2000 to 2002 was littered with volatile up-and-down markets. Although the
prime story for that three-year period was the Nasdaq meltdown, several subplots unfolded,
ranging from the September 11 surprise to the Enron debacle to major trend-following
drawdowns and subsequent recoveries to new highs. It is interesting to note how trend
following performed, for example, compared to the 2002 S&P and Nasdaq.
Table 4.1 – 2002 Performance Histories for Trend Followers
Bill Dunn – 54.23% Salem Abraham – 21.37%
John W. Henry – 45.06% Jerry Parker – 11.1%
David Druze – 33.17% William Eckhart – 14.05%
Mulvaney Capital – 19.37% S&P – 23.27%
Nasdaq – 31.53% Dow – 16.76
Figures 4.14 through 4.21 in the supplemental PDF show what trends they were riding to
produce this performance. Drawdowns and Recoveries
It's no secret for the majority of 2000 trend-following as a strategy was in a drawdown.
It went down significantly heading into the last few months of the year – figures 4.14
through 4.21 in the supplemental PDF. Some press and skeptics were eagerly calling the
strategy finished – kaput. I was not surprised when a Barron's reporter
contacted me for my opinion given the popularity of my trend-following site at the time.
She appeared to have it in for Henry and Dunn and was looking for confirmation that
trend-following was dead. I pointed out drawdowns had occurred in
the past, but that over the long haul trend-following has made tremendous amounts of money. She
ignored those facts. John W. Henry isn't alone in experiencing
hard times, but the firm's losses are among the most staggering. The company's hardest-hit
trend-following program, called Financials and Metals, was down 18.7% in 1999. Henry,
whom one rival calls Our Industries David Kingman, definitely swings for the fences.
Kingman hit 442 home runs during his 16 seasons in the majors, but he also struck out more
than 1,800 times. It's unclear whether John W. Henry will make changes to his trading
program, one he cooked up decades ago while on a vacation to Norway.
You have to wonder if this Barron's reporter had taken the time to read Henry's speech
from November 2000 before writing her December article. Henry was hinting at new success around
the corner. Unfortunately, markets do not step to a drummer we control. The period we
have just been through has been terrifically painful for investors, brokers, general partners,
and trading advisors. Drawdowns affect everyone emotionally, psychologically, and physically
when they persist. It becomes very easy to envision a scenario in which things never
get better. However, experience tells us that things inevitably look bleakest before the tide
turns. The tide was indeed turning. On January 10, 2001, this same reporter sent me an email
to say she was doing a follow-up story and wanted a comment. I was impressed she was willing
to set the record straight because Dunn made 28% in November 2000 and 29% in December 2000.
Henry made 13% in November 2000 and 23% in December 2000.
Here's her follow-up. Wall Street's biggest commodity trading advisors posted a dramatic
turnaround in the fourth quarter, turning last year's heart-stopping losses into gains
for the year. This rebound is not a surprise, says Michael Covell of TurtleTrader.com,
which tracks trend followers. Henry, a high-profile commodities trading firm in Boca Raton,
Florida, profiled by Barron's last month, posted a 20.3% return last year in its largest
trading program, which was down 13.7% for the first nine months of the year, powered
back 39.2% in the fourth quarter. How was Henry able to power back 39.2% in the fourth
quarter of 2000 after posting a loss of 13.7% for the first nine months of the year? What
trends did he ride? Where was his target of opportunity? The answers can be found in Enron,
California, and natural gas. Enron, California, and natural gas.
If you examine the natural gas market during the last few months of 2000 and almost all of 2001,
you can see obvious trend trading opportunity. For trend following, the natural gas market's
massive trend up and down were the source of immense profit. The losers, of course, were
Enron and the State of California. Enron's collapse is a classic case of greed, fear,
and ultimately incompetence on an epic scale. From Enron's upper management's manipulation
of the facts, to the employees who purposefully ignored the manipulations, to the State
of California's inept attempts to play energy markets, everyone should have been accountable
for foolishness. That said, in the zero-sum game, everyone is responsible, whether they
admit it or not. The Enron debacle is stunning when you consider
the losers. The number of investors who deluded themselves into thinking they were on a path
to quick riches is incalculable. Portfolio managers of pension funds, university endowments,
individual investors. Everyone was caught up in the exhilaration of a company that
seemed to go in only one direction, up. Owners of Enron stock never stopped seeing the pot
of gold. They looked the other way and suspended their disbelief to celebrate the zooming share
price. However, there was a gargantuan misstep. They had no strategy to sell when the exit
time arrived as the Enron trend turned hard the other way. The Enron crash chart, see
figure 4.22 in the supplemental PDF, is now famous. And there was only one piece of data
needed to judge Enron, the share price. At its peak, the company's stock traded at
$90 a share, but it collapsed to 50 cents a share. Why would anyone with a pulse
hold onto a stock that goes from $90 to 50 cents? Even if Enron was the biggest scam
ever propagated, hopeful investors who held on all the way down to 50 cents a share are
as responsible as Jeff Skilling. Blind investors bear responsibility for not selling and losing
their money. The chart was telling anyone who cared that the trend had not only changed,
but Enron was going to zero and fast. Not only were there massive winners and losers
in Enron stock, but huge losses were also seen in natural gas during the 2000-2001 California
energy crisis. Enron was a primary supplier for California natural gas, and California,
bound by its own flawed deregulation schemes, freely signed long-term contracts with energy
trading firms buying Enron natural gas for their electricity.
Not surprisingly, with inexperienced players and bad agreements in place, Enron and the
state of California forgot natural gas was just another market. Like any market, it
was subject to go up or down for any number of reasons. Eventually, natural gas spiked
up and then down in ferocious trends. Unfortunately, neither Enron nor the state of California
had a plan in place to deal with price changes.
Being abused, California complained loudly. California Senator Dianne Feinstein maintained
they had no culpability in the game. I am writing to request an additional hearing to pursue
what role Enron had in the California energy crisis with respect to market manipulation
and price gouging. Enron's ability to deal in complex, unregulated financial derivatives
in the natural gas market while controlling a tremendous share of the gas trading market
provided Enron with the ability to manipulate market prices. This was very likely a key
factor in driving up gas and electricity prices leading to the California energy crisis.
It has been said the Enron crisis cost California $45 billion over two years in higher electricity
costs and slowed economic growth. When you look at the charts of natural gas,
C figure 4.23 in the supplemental PDF and Enron, C figure 4.22 in the supplemental PDF,
you have to question Feinstein's basic understanding of markets. Why did California lock itself
in distringent agreements with firms like Enron? Why did California, through its own
deals, trade outside typical market structures? Why couldn't they deal with a changing natural
gas price? The state of California alone is at fault for its inept decisions. Anyone
at any time can trade natural gas. Anyone can hedge a natural gas position. The opportunity
to speculate and hedge is there for everyone. It is not a novel concept. Trend following traders
were playing the natural gas game too, riding it up and down for profit as the following
table 4.2 demonstrates. Table 4.2, trend followers performance.
Dunn Capital Management, WMA, October 2000, 9.12%, November 2000, 28.04%, December 2000,
29.39%, January 2001, 7.72%. John W. Henry Financials and Metals, October
2000, 9.39%, November 2000, 13.33%, December 2000, 23.02%, January 2001, 3.34%, Graham
Capital Management, K-4, October 2000, 1.44%, November 2000, 7.41%, December 2000, 9.37%,
January 2001, 2.37%, Mann Investments, October 2000, 4.54%, November 2000, 10.3%, December
2000, 10.76%, January 2001, 1.49%, Campbell and Company Financials and Metals, October
2000, 3.19%, November 2000, 5.98%, December 2000, 2.38%, January 2001, negative 1.09%, Chesapeake
Capital, October 2000, negative 0.62%, November 2000, 7.42%, December 2000, 8.8%, January 2001,
negative 0.43%, Abraham Trading, October 2000, 9.51%, November 2000, 8.58%, December 2000, negative
0.18%, January 2001, 2.28%. One Enron employee lashed out at the sordid affair. My fellow former
colleagues have no one to blame other than themselves for allowing such disastrous losses
to occur in their retirement accounts. An abdication of personal responsibility should
not be rewarded. It is a sad consequence, but it is reality.
From private mutual fund companies like Janus to retirement funds managed by state governments,
none of them had a plan for exiting Enron. They all bought the stock assuming it would
only go up, but walking away was never part of their plan. Hold on forever was the mantra.
But the Enron story is more profound than the tale of one company's disaster. It is
the all-too-typical story of inept individuals managing billions of retirement wealth. Losses
in Enron were staggering. Japanese banks lost $805.4 million. Abbey National Bank lost 95
million pounds. John Hancock Financial Services lost $102 million. British Petroleum Retirement
lost $55 million on Enron debt. David Brady, a Steinrow focus fund manager.
Where did I go wrong? If I learned anything, I learned the same old lessons. The numbers
just didn't add up. If you had looked at the numbers, the balance sheet would have
showed you the real problems. Notice he blames balance sheets and not his choices.
Public retirement accounts, led by essentially DMV workers, recklessly bet on Enron to
go up forever as well. The Kansas Public Employees Retirement System had about $1.2
million invested in about 82,000 shares of Enron stock.
It was based on Enron's spectacular earnings growth and many analysts recommended it as
a hot stock, said David Brandt, Kansas Securities Commissioner. The retirement fund for the
City of Fort Worth lost nearly $1 million in Enron.
The teacher retirement system of Texas first invested in Enron in June 1994. It realized
a net loss of approximately $23.3 million from its Enron stockholdings and $12.4 million
in net unrealized losses from its current bondholdings in Enron.
Jim Sims of Amarillo, a board member for six years and chairman of the board, said,
We're human beings. When you're investing money, you'll have some winners and some
losers. You can't protect yourself when you're being fed inaccurate information.
We had all the precautions in place. There were no precautions in place, no fails
safes, no stops. Enron's fall from grace was no different than any other corporate
implosion, although the losers, such as those in Table 4.3 and the supplemental PDF,
as this quote reminds, always need to call it new to rationalize losses. However, the
name never changes, even if the company names do.
An interesting aspect of the Enron fiasco was the close relationship between the Enron's
share price and natural gas. To lose money in Enron stock was to lose money in natural
gas. They were connected at the hip. Enron acted as a derivative for natural gas. The
company presented mutual funds and pension funds an opportunity to get into natural
gas speculation, even if their mission statement had them limited to stocks. Using Enron as
a proxy, mutual and pension funds were able to ride natural gas to the top without ever
taking a position in natural gas. Not only was everyone buying and holding Enron, they
were, for all intents and purposes, buying and holding natural gas. The data makes
the case. Table 4.3, largest shareholders in Enron, percent fund in Enron shares.
Alliance Premier Growth, 4.1%. Fidelity Magellan, 0.2%. AIM Value, 1%. Putnam
Investors, 1.7%. Morgan Stanley Dividend Growth, 0.9%. Janus Fund, 2.9%. Janus Twenty, 2.8%.
Janus Mercury, 3.6%. Janus Growth and Income, 2.7%.
Rydex Utility, 8%. Fidelity Select Natural Gas, 5.7%.
Desour Global Equity, 5.6%. Merrill Lynch Focus 20, 5.8%.
AIM Global Technology, 5.3%. Janus Two, 4.7%.
Janus Special Situations, 4.6%. Steinrow Focus, 4.2%.
Alliance Premier Growth, 4.1%. Merrill Lynch Growth, 4.1%.
September 11, 2001. September 11, 2001 demonstrates unpredictable on a grand scale.
How could anyone know in advance where the safe place to be was? Before considering September 11
specifically, consider Ed Secota's words in general. A surprise is an event that catches someone
unaware. If you are already on the trend, the surprises seem to happen to the other guys. No
one predicted a terrorist attack would close Wall Street for four days. Although it was difficult
to stay focused on the rigors of everyday life, trend following maintained. It confronted markets,
as it always had, with a plan set in motion long before the unexpected event happened.
Trend following was short stocks and long bonds ahead of the attack because those markets were
already headed in that direction. For example, Sunrise Capital Partners noted how lucky they
were to be positioned ahead of the attack. Further, Campbell & Company made the case that
currency markets had followed through with continued trends. The US dollar had already
begun to weaken before the attacks. Hence, Campbell was short that market.
Campbell had been long bonds and short a number of global stock index futures contracts ahead of
the attack because of established trends. Although Enron, the California energy crisis,
and September 11 are vivid illustrations of the zero-sum game with trend following as the winner,
the story of long-term capital management in the summer of 1998 is an even better case study.
Event 3. Long-term capital management. Long-term capital management, LTCM,
was a hedge fund that went bust in 1998. The story of who lost has been told repeatedly over
the years. However, because trading is a zero-sum game, exploring the winners was the real story.
LTCM is a classic saga of the zero-sum game played out in grand fashion with trend following
again as the winner. Trillion Dollar Bet, a PBS special, described how LTCM came to be.
In 1973, three economists, Fischer Black, Myron Scholes, and Robert C. Merton,
discovered an elegant formula that revolutionized modern finance. This mathematical holy grail,
the Black-Scholes option pricing formula, was sparse and deceptively simple.
It earned Scholes and Merton a Nobel Prize and attracted the attention of John Merriweather,
the legendary bond trader of Salomon Brothers. LTCM promised to use complex mathematical models
to make investors wealthy beyond their wildest dreams. It attracted the elite of Wall Street's
investors and initially reaped fantastic profits managing money. Ultimately, theories collided with
realities and sent the company spiraling out of control. This was not supposed to happen.
They were immediately seen as a unique enterprise. They had the best minds. They had a former vice
chairman of the Federal Reserve. They had John Merriweather. So they were seen by individual
investors, but particularly by banks and institutions that went in with them as a ticket to Easy
Street. To understand the LTCM fiasco, you again need to look at modern finance's foundations.
Merton Miller and his colleague Eugene F. Fama launched what became the efficient market theory.
The premise of the theory is that stock prices are always right, therefore no one can divine
the market's future direction, which in turn must be random. For prices to be right, of course,
the people who set them must be both rational and well-informed. In other words, Miller and Fama
believed perfectly rational people would never pay more or less than any financial instrument was
worth. As a fervent supporter of the efficient market theory, Myron Scholes was certain markets
could not make mistakes. His associate, Robert Merton, took it a step further with his continuous
time finance theory, which essentially wrapped the financial universe into a supposedly tidy
ball. Merton's markets were as smooth as well-brewed Java in which prices would flow like cream.
He assumed the price of a share of IBM would never plunge directly from 80 to 60,
but would always stop at 79 and three-quarters, 79 and a half, and 79 and one-quarters along
the way. If LTCM's universe was supposed to be in a tidy ball, it might have been because
academic life, where Merton and Scholes pioneered their theories, was tidy. LTCM's founders
believed the market was a perfect normal distribution with no outliers, no fat tails,
and no unexpected events. Problems began the moment these assumptions were accepted.
After Merton, Scholes, and Merriweather had Wall Street convinced the markets were a nice,
neat, and continuous normal distribution, and there was no risk and the party was on,
LTCM began using mammoth leverage for these soon-to-come, risk-free returns.
Approximately 55 major banks gave LTCM financing, including Bankers' Trust, Bear Stearns, Chase
Manhattan, Goldman Sachs, J.P. Morgan, Lehman Brothers, Merrill Lynch, Morgan Stanley, and
Dean Witter. Eventually, LTCM would have $100 billion in borrowed assets and more than $1
trillion worth of exposure in markets everywhere. This type of leverage was not a problem initially,
or so it seemed. Merton was even said to have remarked to Miller,
you could think of LTCM's strategy as a gigantic vacuum cleaner sucking up nickels across the
world. However, it was too complicated, too leveraged, and devoid of anything remotely
resembling trend-following risk management. The Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development outlined a single trade example that uncovered LTCM's overall trading strategy.
It was a bet on the convergence of yield spreads between French bonds,
OATs, and German bonds, BUNs. When the spread between the OATs and the BUNs went to 60 basis
points in the forward market, LTCM decided to double its position. That deal was one leg of
an even more complex convergence bet, which included hedged positions in Spanish Basetta
and Italian Lira bonds. The result of all these complex convergences was no one had a
clue what LTCM was up to risk-wise, including LTCM itself. Its professors ran a secretive and
closed operation so convoluted that regulators and investors had no idea what, when, or how much
they were trading. Not being able to price an instrument or trade freely in and out of it
on a daily basis ignores what Wall Street calls transparency. Jerry Parker sees the differences
between LTCM and his trading. We've always had 100% transparency. The good thing about CTAs
is their strategies are usually straightforward, not something that only a few people in the
world can understand. We're trend-following and systems-based, something you can easily
describe to a client. People who aren't willing to show clients their positions are in trouble.
One of the problems was that people put too much money in these funds,
such as long-term capital management. We ask for just 10% of risk capital,
and clients know they may make 10% one month and lose 10% the next month. The ultimate error is
to put a ton of money with geniuses who never lose money. When all hell breaks loose, those
guys lose everything. Even more than LTCM's lack of transparency, the larger failure involved
lightning, as one critic noted. I don't yet know the balance between whether this was a random event
or whether this was negligence on theirs and their creditors' parts. If a random bolt of lightning
hits you when you're standing in the middle of the field, it feels like a random event.
But if your business is to stand in random fields during lightning storms,
then you should anticipate, perhaps a little more robustly, the risks you're taking on.
The Black-Scholes option pricing formula did not factor in the randomness of human behavior,
only one example of the negligence that ultimately would cause lightning bolts to zap LTCM in August
and September 1998. When lightning struck LTCM, trend following was assessing the same markets,
playing the zero-sum game on the other side. In hindsight, the University of Chicago professors
were clearly aware of the problem, as Nobel Laureate Professor Merton Miller noted.
Models that they were using, not just Black-Scholes models but other kinds of models,
were based on normal behavior in the markets, and when the behavior got wild,
no models were able to put up with it. If only the principals at LTCM had remembered Albert
Einstein's quote that elegance was for tailors, part of his observation about how
beautiful formulas could pose problems in the real world. LTCM had the beautiful formulas,
but they were not for the real world. Eugene Fama, Scholes' thesis advisor,
had deep reservations about his student's options pricing model.
If the population of price changes is strictly normal distribution on the average for any stock,
an observation more than five standard deviations from the mean should be observed about once
every 7,000 years. In fact, such observations seem to occur about once every three to four years.
LTCM lost 44% of its capital, or $1.9 billion, in August 1998 alone.
In a letter to LTCM's 100 investors, dated September 1998, John W. Merriweather wrote,
As you are all too aware, events surrounding the collapse of Russia caused large and dramatically
increasing volatility in global markets throughout August. We are down 44% for the month of August
and 52% for the year to date. Losses of this magnitude are a shock to us, as they surely
are to you, especially in light of the historical volatility of the fund.
At the time of Merriweather's letter, LTCM's history consisted of only four short years,
and although its losses of this magnitude might have shocked LTCM, its clients and the lender
banks to whom it owed over $100 billion, those trading losses became the source of profits for
trend following. Amazingly, years later, Scholes still seemed to have a problem with accepting
personal responsibility for his action in the Zero Sum game. In August of 1998, after the
Russian default, you know, all the relations that tended to exist in a recent past seemed to
disappear. Ultimately, the Fed, along with major world banks, most of which were heavily invested
in LTCM, bailed the firm out. I believe that this bailout was not allowed to happen. There
would have been no precedent for the October 2008 bailouts, which made LTCM look like a walk in
the park. The LTCM bailout stopped normal market forces. It set in motion the events of the next
10 years, culminating in the fall of 2008. And the fixing of 2008, tracing back to LTCM's price
fixing, brings the world up to today, waiting for the next one. The losers. CNN outlined LTCM
losers. Everest Capital, a Bermuda-based hedge fund, lost $1.3 billion. The endowments of Yale
and Brown universities were invested in Everest. George Soros's Quantum Fund lost $2 billion.
High-Risk Opportunity Fund, a $450 million fund run by three offshore advisors, went bust.
The Tiger Fund, run by Julian Robertson, lost $3.3 billion in August and September of 1998.
Lichtenstein Global Trust lost $30 million. Bank of Italy lost $100 million.
Credit Suisse lost $55 million. UBS lost $690 million. Sandy Wheel lost $10 million.
Drezner lost $145 million. The Winners
As dramatic as the LTCM blowout story is, the real lessons you can learn are from the winners.
Campbell & Company was candid. If you look back to the early part of 1998,
you will see it was a similar period in terms of industry returns. It was a very sad time all the
way through July, and then out of nowhere it came, the collapse or the near collapse of Russia in
August and the LTCM crisis. All of a sudden, August was up 10% and September and October
were up 4% or 5%, and many CTAs pulled down an 18% or 20% year out of nowhere. It's very hard
to put your head back where you were three months before that and say it looked like a
very gloomy business, without much of a future, and all of a sudden we're the place it's all at.
The hedge fund world had fallen apart, equities had gone into the toilet,
and managed futures were king and on the front page of the Wall Street Journal.
So some of this is the psychology of what we do.
Trend following performance data for August and September 1998
looks like one continuous credit card swipe from LTCM to trend following,
a zero-sum transfer swipe. During the exact period that LTCM lost $1.9 billion in assets,
the aggregate profits – see Table 4.4 in the supplemental PDF – of Bill Dunn, John W. Henry,
Jerry Parker, Keith Campbell, and Mann exceeded $1 billion. Crunch the numbers on Dunn Capital
Management's World Monetary Assets, WMA, fund. Their fund made nearly $300 million for the
months of August and September 1998 alone. For example, here are markets from which trend
following strategy profited. See figures 4.24 to 4.31 in the supplemental PDF.
Table 4.4, trend following profits August to September 1998. Dunn Capital Management,
WMA, July 1998, negative 1.37 percent, 575 million. August, 1998, 27.51 percent, 732 million.
September 1998, 16.8 percent, 862 million. Dunn Capital Management, TOPS, July 1998,
negative 1.08 percent, 133 million. August, 1998, 9.48 percent, 150 million.
September, 1998, 12.9 percent, 172 million. John W. Henry, Financials and Metals, July 1998,
negative 0.92 percent, 959 million. August, 1998, 17.5 percent, 1 billion, 95 million.
September, 1998, 15.26 percent, 1 billion, 240 million.
Campbell and Company, Financials and Metals, July 1998, negative 3.68 percent, 917 million.
August, 1998, 9.23 percent, 1 billion, 7 million. September, 1998, 2.97 percent, 1 billion,
43 million. Chesapeake Capital, July 1998, 3.03 percent, 1 billion, 111 million.
August, 1998, 7.27 percent, 1 billion, 197 million. September, 1998, negative 0.59 percent,
1 billion, 179 million. Man Investments, July 1998, 1.06 percent, 1 billion, 636 million.
August, 1998, 14.51 percent, 1 billion, 960 million. September, 1998, 3.57 percent,
2 billion, 81 million. LTCM's failure lessons are now taught by all prominent business schools,
but they leave out the winning lessons trend follower Jerry Parker teaches.
Transparent. By and large, trend followers trade markets on regulated exchanges. They are not
cooking up new derivatives in basements. Trend followers typically trade on freely
traded markets where a price that everyone can see enables anyone to buy or sell.
Trend followers have nothing in common with the derivatives fiascos that damaged Orange County or
Procter & Gamble. Understandable. Trend following strategies can be understood by anybody. No high
level math, only PhDs can comprehend. No rock stars. There are individuals who not only want
to make money, but also want a rock star as their portfolio manager. They want to think that the
strategy being used to make them money is exciting and state of the art. Trend followers are not in
the game for notoriety, only to win. I always wonder what would have happened and how much
more money trend following models would have made if LTCM had been allowed to implode without
preferential government interference, and I asked Dunn Capital whether they thought LTCM's bailout
was proper. They replied with a one-word answer, no. Bill Dunn responded with even more clarity.
I believe the long-term capital management collapse was caused by one, their trading
approach was based on the theory prices and relationships between prices tend to vary,
but they also tend to return to their mean value over long periods of time. So in practice,
they probably looked at a market, or a spread between markets, and determined what its mean
value was and where the current price was in relation to their estimate of its true mean value.
If the current price was below the mean, a buy was indicated, and if it was above the mean,
a sell was indicated. I don't know what their exit strategy was.
2. The main problem with the above is that as market prices move further against your position,
you will be experiencing losses in your open positions, and your above trading approach would
suggest that adding to the current position will prove to be even more profitable than
originally expected. Unless this market quickly turns and starts its anticipated return to its
mean, additional losses will be suffered, and the potential for profit will seem to become even
greater, although elusive. 3. This problem can only be overcome by either adopting a strict entry
and exit strategy that is believed to promote survivability, or by having a nearly unlimited
amount of capital slash credit to withstand the occasional extreme excursions from the mean,
or better yet, adopt both of these ideas. 4. But the situation became even more
unstable when LTCM ventured into highly illiquid investment vehicles and also became a very major
part of these very thin markets. 5. In the end, they became overextended,
and they ran out of capital before any anticipated reversion to the mean could bail them out.
Those who cannot or will not learn from the past always set themselves up for another August-September
1998 lightning bolt. Another LTCM fiasco was always in the offing since the Black Scholes
way of life, where the world is a normal distribution, is still considered a viable
approach to investing in 2017. Philip Anderson, joint winner of a Nobel Prize in physics,
sees the dangers in normal distribution thinking. Much of the world is controlled as much by the
tales of distributions as by means or averages, by the exceptional not the mean, by the catastrophe
not the steady drip, by the very rich not the middle class. We need to free ourselves from
average thinking. And breaking out from average thinking starts with hitting home runs,
that is trend following, instead of hitting supposed surefire singles, that is LTCM.
Footnotes to LTCM
Myron Scholes went on to form a new fund, Platinum Grove, after LTCM's demise. With Scholes as a
chairman, Platinum Grove lost $600 million during 2007-2008. A great story about LTCM hiring Goldman
Sachs to assist raising cash during the crisis. LTCM gave their derivatives positions to Goldman
Sachs as part of their due diligence. Goldman Sachs traders stayed up all night using the LTCM
data to front run their clients in markets around the world. Goldman, led by John Corzine,
was in similar spread trades as LTCM and was losing billions itself. With the LTCM data,
Goldman unwound trades like a precision guided missile instead of a machine gun firing
indiscriminately. Ultimately Goldman failed to raise money for LTCM, but it was mission
accomplished in terms of gaining insight information. If Goldman could not save the
system, it would at least save itself. Event 4. Asian Contagion
The 1997 Asian Contagion was another event where trend following won out.
To this day in 2017, if you drive around Bangkok, Thailand, or Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia,
you can still see unfinished skyscrapers left as artifacts of yet another financial implosion.
One of the biggest losers during this meltdown was infamous trader Victor Niederhofer.
Always opinionated, bombastic, and for most of his trading career exceptionally successful,
Niederhofer's trading demise was swift. Niederhofer played a big game, whether it's
speculating chess or squash. He challenged grandmasters in chess and he won repeated
titles as a national squash champion. He regularly bet hundreds of millions of
dollars and consistently won until Monday, October 27, 1997. That day he lost an estimated
$50 to $100 million and his three hedge funds, Limited Partners of Niederhofer Intermarket
Fund, LP, Limited Partners of Niederhofer Friends Partnership, LP, and Niederhofer Global Systems
SA, Belly Dop. Imagine receiving this letter faxed from Niederhofer on Wednesday, October 29, 1997.
Two, Limited Partners of Niederhofer Intermarket Fund, LP, Limited Partners of Niederhofer Friends
Partnership, LP, Shareholders of Niederhofer Global Systems, SA. Dear customers, as you no
doubt are aware, the New York stock market dropped precipitously on Monday, October 27, 1997.
That drop followed large declines on two previous days. This precipitous decline caused
substantial losses in the fund's positions, particularly their positions in puts on the
Standard & Poor's 500 Index. As you also know from my previous correspondence with you,
the funds suffered substantial losses earlier in the year as a result of the collapse in the
East Asian markets, especially in Thailand. The accumulation of these adverse developments led to
the situation where, at the close of business on Monday, the funds were unable to meet minimum
capital requirements for the maintenance of their margin accounts. It is not yet clear what is the
precise extent, if any, to which the fund's equity balances are negative. We have been working with
our broker-dealers since Monday evening to try to meet the fund's obligations in an orderly
fashion. However, right now, the indications are that the entire equity positions in the funds
has been wiped out. Sadly, it would appear that if it had been possible to delay liquidating most
of the fund's accounts for one more day, a liquidation could have been avoided.
Nevertheless, we cannot deal with would have been. We took risks. We were successful for a
long time. This time we did not succeed and I regret to say that all of us have suffered
some very large losses. Nederhofer seems unable to acknowledge that he alone was to blame for
his losses in the zero-sum game. He did it. It was his strategy. No one else did it for him
and using the unexpected as an excuse is no excuse. It is interesting to note his trading
performance was long heralded as low risk. He made money almost every month. Compared to trend
following drawdowns, he was the golden boy making money as consistently as a casino.
Who would want to place money with trend following and potentially tolerate a steep drawdown
when they could put money with Nederhofer who seemed to combine similar performance
with what happened to be far less risk and almost no drawdown? That's how the narrative
looked before Nederhofer's flame-out. But the idea Nederhofer was devoid of risk
disappeared quickly with his trading firm's 1997 demise. Examine his performance numbers
during that year. See table 4.5 in the supplemental pdf. When reviewing Nederhofer's performance
meltdown, keep in mind in the last issue of the Stark Report where his performance was still
listed, his ranking was as follows. Return, four stars. Risk, four stars. Risk adjusted,
four stars. Equity, five stars. The star rankings gave the impression
Nederhofer was risk-free. However, his trading, like LTCM's, was predicated on a world of normal
distributions. Measuring him with standard deviation as the risk measure gave an imperfect
view of Nederhofer's true risk. Some observers were well aware of the problems in Nederhofer's
contrarian style long before the flame-out. Frank J. Frankian spoke out six months earlier.
It's a matter of time before something goes wrong. But Nederhofer loyalists were concerned
only with whether the profits were continually coming in even if his strategy was deeply
flawed and potentially dangerous. His clients were enamored. Whatever voodoo he uses, it works,
said Timothy P. Horn, chairman of Watts Industries, Inc., and a Nederhofer customer since 1982.
The vast majority of Nederhofer clients did not realize until after their accounts were toast
that voodoo doesn't work. Nederhofer on trend following.
Five years after his blowout, Nederhofer began ripping trend following, granted that some users
of trend following have achieved success. Doubtless their intelligence and insights are
quite superior to our own. But it's at times like these, when everything seems to be coming up roses
for the trend followers' theories and reputations, that it's worthwhile to step back and consider
some fundamental questions. Is there central rule? Is the trend your friend valid?
Might reported results, good or bad, be best explained as due to chance? He added.
But first a warning. We do not believe in trend following. We are not members of the
Market Technicians' Association or the International Federation of Technical Analysts
or the Turtle Traders' Trend Followers' Hall of Fame. In fact, we are on the enemies' list
of such organizations. Nederhofer continued. No test of the trend is your friend is possible
because the rule is never put forward in the form of a testable hypothesis.
Something is always slippery, subjective, or even mystical about the rule's interpretation
and execution. Even though the market is the ultimate arbiter, it's always right.
Nederhofer still didn't let go. In my dream, I am long IBM or Priceline.com.
Or, worst of all, Krung Thai Bank, the state-owned bank in Thailand that fell from $200 to pennies
while I held it in 1997. The rest of the dream is always the same. My stock plunges.
Massive margin calls are being issued. Related stocks jump off cliffs in sympathy.
Delta hedges are selling more stocks short to rebalance their positions.
The naked options, I am sure, are going through the roof. Millions of investors are
blindly following the headlines. Listless as zombies, they are liquidating their stocks at
any price and piling into money market funds with an after-tax yield of negative one percent.
Stop, you fools, I scream. There's no danger, can't you see? The headlines are inducing you to
lean the wrong way. Unless you get your balance, you'll lose everything—your wealth, your home.
Many smart players to this day view Nederhofer as brilliant.
And I see his wisdom in some work and hope to have him on my podcast one day.
But markets are unforgiving. Get the risk wrong and its obituaries.
Event 5. Bearings Bank
The first few months of 1995 go down as one of the most eventful periods in the history of
speculative trading. The market events of that period by themselves could be the subject of
a Harvard Ph.D. finance course. But twenty years later, despite the enduring significance,
the events have been forgotten and no Harvard class ever materialized.
What happened? A rogue trader, Nick Leeson, overextended Bearings Bank in the Nikkei 225,
the Japanese equivalent of the Dow, by speculating that the index would go higher.
It tanked instead, and Bearings, the Queen's Bank, one of the oldest, most well-established
banks in England, collapsed, losing $2.2 billion. Who won the Bearings Bank sweepstakes? That
question was never asked by anyone, not the Wall Street Journal, nor Investors Business Daily.
Was the world interested only in a story about failure and not the slightest bit curious about
where $2.2 billion went? Trend following was sitting at the table devouring Leeson's mistakes.
The majority of traders do not have the discipline to plan three, six, and twelve months ahead for
unforeseen changes in markets. However, planning for the unexpected is an essential ingredient of
trend following strategy. Huge moves to profit from are always on the horizon if you are
reacting to the market and not trying to predict it. Sadly, most market players only
know to make decisions based on their perceptions of what the market direction will be. After they
make their directional choice, they are blinded to any other option. They keep searching for
validation to support their analysis even if they are losing colossal money, like Nick Leeson.
Before the Kobe earthquake in early January 1995, with the Nikkei trading in a range of 19,000
to 19,500, Leeson had long futures positions of approximately 3,000 contracts on the Osaka stock
exchange. After the Kobe earthquake of January 17, his buildup of Nikkei positions intensified
and Leeson kept buying as the Nikkei sank. Who Won? Observe the Nikkei 225,
see figure 4.32 in the supplemental PDF, from September 1994 until June 1995.
Bearings lost assets directly patted the pockets of disciplined trend following traders.
A few months after Bearings, John W. Henry's performance made the case clear.
Table 4.6, John W. Henry trading programs. Name of program, financials and metals.
January 95, 648 million dollars, negative 3.8 monthly percent returns.
February 95, 733 million dollars, 15.7 percent. March 95, 827 million dollars, 15.3 percent.
Global diversified. January 95, 107 million dollars, negative 6.9 percent. February 95,
120 million dollars, 13.5 percent. March 95, 128 million dollars, 8.5 percent.
Original. January 95, 54 million dollars, 2.1 percent. February 95, 64 million dollars, 17.9
percent. March 95, 73 million dollars, 16.6 percent. Global financial. January 95, 7 million
dollars, negative 4.1 percent. February 95, 9 million dollars, 25.6 percent. March 95, 14
million dollars, 44.4 percent. Dean Witter, now Morgan Stanley,
was Henry's broker at the time. I have over 250 million with Henry. I have been pleased to see
how well the original Henry program has done so far in 1995. Up over 50 percent through April 18,
1995. Other trend followers brought home huge gains in February and March of 1995.
See table 4.7 in the supplemental pdf. However, their winnings arguably were more from the
Japanese yen trend up and down. There might be slight differences in leverage and signal timing,
but even a quick glance makes clear. Immense trends equaled monster profits for almost all
trend followers. Henry confirmed in 1998, albeit cryptically, his massive zero-sum bearings win.
The inflation story, of course, is not the most dramatic example. More recently,
Asia is another example of how one-time big events can lead to trends that offer us opportunity
and really shape our world. Whether you believe the casual story of banking excesses in Asia or
not, there was a clear adjustment in the Asian economies that has been and will continue to be
drawn out. Under these situations, it's natural that trends will develop, and recognizing these
trends allows us to capitalize on the errors or mistakes of other market participants. Because,
after all, we're involved in a zero-sum game. Henry and Lisan were indeed involved in the age-old
zero-sum game, like in so many other historical examples. They both bellied up to the table,
but there was one big difference. Henry had an actual strategy. What Lisan had, nobody knows,
but as long as he was making money, his bosses in England did not care.
Yes, they cared after he destroyed the bank, but by then it was too late.
Event 6. Mittal Gesellschaft. Mittal Gesellschaft, MG, now has a new name and a new identity as
a specialty chemicals plant and process engineering concern. However, after 119 years of success as a
German metals trading and construction conglomerate, it became best known for its high-profile trading
loss of $1.5 billion, $2.3 billion Deutsche Marks at the time. You know what's coming,
another zero-sum lesson in action, and while I'm sure some might feel that an event this long
ago holds no value, pause that thought and consider greed and fear.
The story starts with MG Long Crude Oil Futures on the New York Mercantile Exchange,
NIMEX, through most of 1993. During that time period, MG lost between $1.3 and $2.1 billion.
The winners were trend followers. Over the course of 1993, Crude Oil Futures,
see Figure 4.33 in the supplemental PDF, slowly declined from May through December.
You know the drill. There is always someone on the other side of a trade.
The difficulty, of course, lies in determining who was on the opposite side of a position
if only one side is publicly known. The fact MG lost was well known, but who won was my
curiosity in the mid-to-late 1990s, and in the aftermath of the MG losses,
a variety of explanations developed. The financial world was treated to academic
mumbo-jumbo from MBA students analyzing why MG lost as well as articles condemning energy futures.
The actual explanation for implosion is simple. MG had zero trading strategy and lost.
Trend following players had a major role in MG's demise, and the job of explaining
this was made easy with publicly available trend following performance data.
See Table 4.8 in the supplemental PDF. The key to explaining Table 4.8 lies in the
months of July 1993, December 1993, and January 1994. Those months do not require much more than
a casual glance at correlations to confirm the similarity in trend following strategies.
Trend following made money in July and December and lost in January. The academics, media,
and everyone else, it seems, figured out professional traders were shorting energy markets and putting
extensive pressure on MG. What the academics never found out, or never seemed to be too
interested to find out, was who those professional traders were. The performance data was out there
for everybody to look at. It wasn't a secret. I found it on file with the United States Commodity
Futures Trading Commission. Every day, trend following models dictate how many contracts
or shares to trade based on total capital on hand at that time. For example, after trend
following traders initiated positions and were rewarded with strong profits in July, they
were willing to risk those profits again. In August, with nice profits in hand,
they were willing to risk those profits and still lose a fixed percentage based on original stops.
They were willing to let profits on the table turn into losses.
They let the market tell them when the trend was over, January 1994.
In the fall of 1993, trend followers continued to hold established short positions in crude oil
futures. MG was long crude oil futures and desperately trying to stay afloat while trend
followers waited like predators. However, trend followers were not short. They were aggressively
short, reinvesting profits back into additional short crude oil positions as the market decreased
more and more. On the losing side of this zero-sum game, MG refused to take a loss early on.
In fact, the whole MG affair would have been a footnote in trading history if they had exited
after the July price decline. Instead, MG stayed in the game in hopes of an upward trend to make
up for losses. They wanted to get back at the market and break even, a common psychological
issue that bedevils new to pro traders to this day. But MG obviously had no inkling of the
steely discipline of their trend following opponents. Not one trend follower was going
to exit anytime soon. The price told them the trend was down. An exit would have violated
one of trend following's most fundamental rules, one of the most fundamental rules across all of
successful trading. Let your winners run. As the story winds down, crude oil futures begins
its final descent in late November and into December. At this time, MG management liquidated
their positions and further fueled the November and December crude oil price drop. Ultimately,
all good trends must end, and trend followers would eventually begin their crude oil futures
exit in January 1994. If you look at the performance of trend followers in January 1994
see table 4.8 in the supplemental pdf. You can see what they lost for the month as they
extricated themselves from their history-making profits of 1993.
Table 4.9 1993 trend following returns name Abraham trading percent return 34.29 percent
Chesapeake Capital 61.82 percent Mann Investments 24.49 percent
Raybar Market Research 49.55 percent Don W.M.A 60.25 percent John W. Henry 46.85 percent Mark J. Walsh
74.93 percent Eckhart Trading 57.95 percent There is no shortage of big events in the past
50 years to show the prowess of trend following. However, there are rabid skeptics who suspect
they know the Achilles heel of trend following strategy, the 1987 stock market crash.
Event 7. Black Monday One of my favorite questions that I still
hear to this day. How did trend following do during the 1987 Black Monday stock crash?
How did it do during a 20-year standard deviation event? Their tone always says what they think the
answer will be and what they hope it will be. That trend following was killed that day.
I now must be the bearer of bad news for those skeptics.
The fall of 1987 produced historic gains for trend following.
Table 4.10 October to November 1987 stock market crash name S&P 500 percent return
negative 28 percent John W. Henry original investment program 58.2 percent John W. Henry
financials and metals portfolio 69.7 percent Table 4.11 trend following performance 1987
name Chesapeake Capital percent return 38.78 percent JPD 96.8 percent
Raybar 78.2 percent John W. Henry financials and metals 251 percent
Campbell and Company financials and metals 64.38 percent Milburn Ridgefield 32.68 percent
Dunn Capital Management WMA 72.15 percent Mark J. Walsh 143 percent
Mann Investments 42.54 percent I also pulled The Economist from March 1987,
which to my fortunate surprise included quotes and references to a then 26-year-old David Harding
and a then 31-year-old Larry Hight. Highlights
Technical analysis of financial markets starts with the assumption markets follow trends determined by
previous patterns of price behavior and that rarely, if ever, move randomly. A chartist will
attempt to discern a trend by spotting recognizable movements in the price of a security or commodity
which confirm a breakout, either up or down, from the range within which the price has
previously been trading. Larry Hight compared a computer to an anvil. Ideas can be hammered
out on it and discarded if they do not come up to scratch. David Harding's computer system not
only generates buy and sell signals, it also shows how long an investment should be held.
Only 50 percent of his trades are profitable, but winners are on average three times bigger
than losers. 1987 critics called Harding and Hight's trend following efforts a fad.
I was having dinner with Larry Hight in late 2016 and I brought up that he was called a 1987 fad,
but his mantra doesn't change. What he said in 1987, he says in 2017,
The evidence is in. All we can do is trust evidence until it changes.
A main reason trend following trading has done so well for so long is because it has no quarterly
performance constraints. Both Wall Street and Main Street measure success on the artificial
constraints of the calendar. Trend following does not. For example, looking back at the end of
2008, you can see that without October 2008's home run, trend following would have had a
different performance profile. History now would be remembered differently. The notion of
quarterly performance measures implies you can predict the market or achieve profit targets.
Quarters as a measurement might not be real, but they provide a comfortable structure for
investors who mistakenly believe they can demand consistent profits. This demand for consistency
has led to a constant search for the holy grail or hot hand to the detriment of ever winning
consistently. Imagine playing football where there are four quarters and you have to score
in each quarter to win. Imagine placing more importance on scoring in each quarter than
winning the game. Now a great trend trader says, I might score 28 points in any of the
four quarters. I might score at any point in the game, but the object at the end of the game
is to win. If a trend following trader scores 28 points in the first quarter and no points
in the next three quarters and wins, who cares when he scored? Trend followers are home run
hitters taking what the market gives them no matter when it arrives. Absolute return traders
have no profit targets. They view the world as a rolling return. I asked Bill Dunn how they
address quarterly performance measures popular on Wall Street. I wanted to know exactly how
they educate clients to appreciate big event hunting. His response, clients must already have
an appreciation for the pitfalls of relying on short term performance data before they can
appreciate us. That's blunt talk for a serious game. On the other hand, after he retired,
Julian Robertson publicly slammed his constraints, comparing them to a necessary but incompetent
baseball umpire. One of the great investors likened it to a batter not having an umpire.
If you don't have an umpire, you can wait for the fat pitch. The trouble with investing for
other people, particularly in a hedge fund, is that you do have an umpire called quarterly
performance. Jason Gerlach, of trend following firm Sunrise Capital, provided even more event
data buttressing the issues with calendar mandated benchmarks. The S&P contrasted against a trend
following index shows the historical performance differential when historical events hit.
Time period 1987, quarter 4. Event, Black Monday. S&P 500 index performance, negative 22.53%.
Barkley CTA index performance, 13.77%. 2002, quarter 3. WorldCom scandal, S&P 500 index,
negative 17.28%. Barkley CTA index, 6.77%. 2001, quarter 3. 911. S&P index performance,
negative 14.68%. Barkley CTA index, 2.62%. 2011, quarter 3. European debt crisis, S&P 500 index,
negative 13.87%. Barkley CTA index performance, 1.65%. 1990, quarter 3. Iraq invades Kuwait.
S&P 500 index, negative 13.75%. Barkley CTA index, 5.82%. 2002, quarter 2. Combubble.
S&P 500 index, negative 13.4%. Barkley CTA index, 8.2%. 2001, quarter 1,
tech bear market. S&P 500 index, negative 11.86%. Barkley CTA index, 3.75%.
1998, quarter 3. Russian default, slash LTCM. S&P 500 index, negative 9.95%.
Barkley CTA index, 8.95%. 2008, quarter 1. Credit crisis. S&P 500 index, negative 9.45%.
Barkley CTA index, 6.91%. 2008, quarter 3. Credit crisis. Bailout. S&P 500 index, negative 8.37%.
Barkley CTA index, negative 3.02%. 2000, quarter 4. Combubbleburst. S&P 500 index,
negative 7.83%. Barkley CTA index, 9.86%. 2015, quarter 3. Fed policy uncertainty.
S&P 500 index, negative 6.4%. Barkley CTA index, negative 0.27%.
1999, quarter 3. Y2K anxiety. S&P 500 index, negative 6.25%.
Barkley CTA index, negative 0.79%. 1994, quarter 1, Fed rate hikes.
S&P 500 index, negative 3.79%. Barkley CTA index, negative 2.76%.
2007, quarter 4, credit crisis. S&P 500 index, negative 3.33%.
Barkley CTA index, 4.07%. 2003, quarter 1, Second Gulf War. S&P 500 index, negative 3.15%.
Barkley CTA index, 0.72%. 1990, quarter 1, recession, oil spike.
S&P 500 index, negative 2.99%. Barkley CTA index, 5.43%.
Keiron Nutbrown, while not researching trend following, provided a chronology
of financial crises and market panics dating from the Middle Ages to present day.
1255, overexpansion of credit led to banking failures in 1255-62 in Italy.
1294, Edward I default to the Ricciardi of Lucca during war with France.
1298, seizure of the Grand Tivola of Siena by Philip IV of France.
1307, liquidation of the Knights Templar by Philip IV.
1311, Edward II default to the Fresco Baldi of Florence. 1326,
bankruptcy of the Scaly of Florence and Asti of Siena.
1342, Edward III default to the Florentine Banks during the Hundred Years' War.
1345, bankruptcy of the Bardi and Peruzzi, depression, great crash of the 1340s.
1380, Chompi revolt in Florence, crash of the early 1380s.
1401, Italian bankers expelled from Oregon in 1401, England in 1403, France in 1410.
1433, fiscal crisis in Florence after wars with Milan and Lucca.
1464, death of Cosimo de Medici, loans called in, wave of bankruptcies in Florence.
1470, Edward IV default to the Medici during the Wars of the Roses.
1478, Bruges branch of the Medici Bank liquidated on bad debts.
1494, overthrow the Medici after the capture of Florence by Charles VIII of France.
1525, siege of Genoa by forces of Spain and the Holy Roman Empire, coup in 1527.
1557, Philip II of Spain restructuring of debts inherited from Charles V.
1566, start of the Dutch revolt against Spain, disruption of Spanish trade.
1575, Philip II default, financial crisis of 1575-79 affected Genoese creditors.
1596, Philip II default, financial crisis of 1596 severely affected Genoese businessmen.
1607, Spanish state bankruptcy, failure of Genoese banks.
1619, Kipper und Viprasite, monetary crisis at the outbreak of the Thirty Years' War.
1627, Spanish bankruptcy, collapse of Genoese banks and the Fugers.
1637, end of the Dutch Tulipmania, also Dutch East India Company shares, canals.
1648, French state bankruptcy eliminated the Italian bankers.
1652, outbreak of the First Anglo-Dutch War, attacks by Britain on Dutch shipping.
1666, Second Anglo-Dutch War, disruption of the Dutch spice fleet.
1672, Crumpier, disaster year in Holland, French-slash-English invasion.
1696, English government debt crisis during the Nine Years' War against France.
1705, English crisis during the War of the Spanish Succession against France.
1720, collapse of the South Sea bubble in England and Mississippi bubble in France.
1761, English government debt crisis over the Seven Years' War against France.
1769, collapse of the Bengal bubble in East India Company stock.
1772, credit crisis in London and the American colonies.
1783, economic depression in Britain and America after the Revolutionary War.
1792, boom and bust in the First Bank of the United States after Hamilton's refunding.
1797, land speculation bubble burst, bank run in England on fear of French invasion.
1802, boom and bust after the Peace of Amia between Britain and France.
1807, Jefferson's Embargo Act, restriction of trade with Britain.
1812, outbreak of the War of 1812 between America and Britain.
1819, land bubble burst, bank failures, tightening by the Second Bank of the U.S.
1825, emerging market, Latin America, bubble burst in London.
1837, collapse of bubbles in canals, cotton and land, run on banks.
1847, collapse of railway boom in London, following Bank Charter Act.
1857, global market panic, railway bubble, failure of Ohio Life Company.
1866, failure of over-end gurney and company in London, banking crisis.
1869, Black Friday in New York, collapse of Gould and Fisk gold speculation.
1873, railroad bubble, Jay Cook failure, end of silver coinage.
1877, great railroad strike, deflation and wage cuts following the Panic of 1873.
1884, tightening by New York City National Banks, bank failures in New York.
1893, railroad bubble burst, bank failures, run on gold reserves, Sherman Silver Act.
1896, run on silver reserves, commodity price declines, National Bank of Illinois failure.
1901, cornering of Northern Pacific Railway stock.
1907, bankers panic, cornering of United Copper Company, failure of Knickerbocker Trust Company.
1910, enforcement of Sherman Antitrust Act, break up of Standard Oil Company.
1913, drain of gold reserves to Europe and lead up to World War I.
1921, depression of 1920-21, demobilization, monetary tightening, severe deflation.
1929, Wall Street crash, Black Tuesday, collapse of 1920s boom.
1932, Great Depression trough, widespread bank failures.
1938, monetary and fiscal tightening following New Deal, Roosevelt recession.
1942, response to Japanese-German successes in World War II.
1948, monetary tightening by the Federal Reserve, recession of 1949.
1953, monetary tightening to combat post-Korean war inflation in 1952.
1957, Eisenhower recession, monetary tightening to combat inflation.
1962, Kennedy slide slash flash crash, Cuban Missile Crisis.
1969, Nixon recession, monetary and fiscal tightening to combat inflation and deficit.
1974, oil crisis, OPEC embargo, rising inflation and unemployment stagflation.
1979, energy crisis, Iranian Revolution, monetary tightening under Paul Volcker.
1982, continued Fed tightening on energy crisis, defaults by Mexico, Brazil, Argentina.
1984, continental Illinois bank failure and seizure by the FDIC.
1987, Black Monday, global market crash, collapse of speculative boom.
1990, Gulf War, spike in oil price, recession of 1990-92.
1994, tequila crisis, Mexico peso devaluation, Federal Reserve rate hikes.
1998, Asia crisis, began 1997, Russia default, LTCM failure.
2001, collapse of dot-com bubble, 9-11 attacks, corporate accounting scandals.
2008, collapse of housing bubble, global financial crisis, Lehman AIG etc. failures.
2011, US debt ceiling crisis and credit rating downgrade, Eurozone sovereign debt crisis.
2015, end of the Federal Reserve's zero interest rate policy, quantitative easing ended 2014.
2016, Brexit.
The surprise event list will never stop expanding.
They say history is never the same, but it sure rhymes more often than not.
That rhyming is why the following passage was added to my second edition in fall 2005.
It was commentary from The Economist circa February 2004.
The size of banks' bets is rising rapidly the world over.
This is because potential returns have fallen as fast as markets have risen.
So banks have had to bet more in order to continue generating huge profits.
The present situation is not dissimilar to the one that preceded the collapse of LTCM.
Banks are walking themselves to the edge of the cliff.
This is because, as all past financial crises have shown,
the risk management models they use woefully underestimate the savage effects of big shocks
when everybody is trying to wiggle out of their positions at the same time.
By regulatory fiat, when banks position sour,
they must either stump up more capital or reduce their exposures.
Invariably, when markets are panicking, they do the latter.
Because everyone else is heading for the exits at the same time,
these become more than a little crowded, moving prices against those trying to get out
and requiring still more unwinding of positions.
It has happened many times before with more or less calamitous consequences.
There are any number of potential flashpoints, a root in the dollar, say,
or a huge spike in the oil price, or a big emerging market getting into trouble again.
If it does happen, the chain reaction could be particularly devastating this time.
That prediction unfolded like a movie script in 2008,
and it's guaranteed to unfold again, though no one can accurately predict the next tsunami's
landfall. Former LTCM Council sees we are on borrowed time. The reason to revisit the story
LTCM now is to show how the 2008 panic was foretold by 1998's events.
Circumstances were different in 1998 and 2008, yet the dynamics were the same.
Disturbingly, the next panic is now foretold by both 1998 and 2008.
No lessons were learned. Elites simply expanded the bailout each time.
Except, next time, the panic will be too large, and the bailout too small to stop it.
Nassim Taleb clarified further and easily understood lay terms in November 2016.
The market has been on Novocaine since 2009. Still, numbed and awash in zombie film fascination,
the average Joe will sit there, as Hunter S. Thompson crooned, and a nation ruled by swine,
all pigs are upward mobile, and the rest of us are fucked until we can put our acts together.
Not necessarily to win, but mainly to keep from losing completely. We owe that to ourselves
and our crippled self-image as something better than a nation of panicked sheep.
Enjoy the ride. You can't stop it. Summary food for thought.
Trend following is generally on the right side of surprise.
It was a stunning development. Value at risk, VAR models, measure volatility, not risk.
Hunt Taylor. The single worst descriptor of negative events is the hundred-year flood.
Am I wrong? How many hundred-year floods have we lived through in this room?
Statistically, maybe we should have lived through one, and we live through seven now at this point.
Young America in Wall Street, 1857. The sooner the people of the United States make up their
minds that the financial boom of 1857 eclipses every other crisis since the time that Columbus
was under obligations to a North American savage for a raccoon steak, the better.
Thomas F. Woodlock, 1866-1945. The principles of successful stock speculation are based on
the supposition that people will continue in the future to make the mistakes that they have made
in the past. Peter Cheer. My concern is that when something comes to bite us in the butt,
it's not going to be something we've traditionally looked at, and it's going to take a while for the
markets to adjust. Morgan Housle. A normal person isn't capable of leveraging their portfolio 100-to-1,
losing everything when the market sneezes, and blaming it on a 25-sigma event.
You need a Ph.D. in physics to convince yourself of that.
Wolfgang Munchau. The curse of our time is fake maths. Think of it as fake news for numerically
literate intellectuals. It is the abuse of statistics and economic models to peddle one's
own political prejudice. The fakeness of the maths lies in an exaggerated inference. Economic models
have their uses, as do opinion polls. They provide information to policymakers and markets.
But nobody can see through the fog of the future.


# Chapter 12

These are the side margin quotations for chapter four.
An investment in Dunn Capital acts as a hedge
against unpredictable market crises.
Dunn Capital Management.
I'd say that Proctor and Gamble did what their name says.
They proctored and gambled.
And now they're complaining.
Leo Malamut.
It often seems that trends create events
more than events create trends.
The event itself is usually a reflection
of everyone getting it, as Ed Seacota calls it, an aha.
By this time, the trend followers usually have
well-established positions.
Jason Russell.
On Saturday, February 25th, 1995,
Mike Killian, who almost single-handedly built
Barring's Far East customer brokerage business
over the past seven years,
was awakened at 4.30 a.m. in his Portland, Oregon home.
It was Fred Hockenberger from the Barring's Hong Kong office.
Are you sitting down?
Hockenberger asked, a sleepy Killian.
No, I'm lying down.
Have you heard any rumors?
Killian, perplexed, said no.
I think we're bust.
Is this a crank call?
Killian asked.
There's a really ugly story coming out
that perhaps Nick Leeson has taken the company down.
One reason for this paucity of early information
is suggested by the following part
of the term trend following.
The implication is one of passivity, of reaction,
rather than of bold, assertive action,
and human nature shows a distinct preference for the latter.
Also, trend following appears to be too simple
an idea to be taken seriously.
Indeed, simple ideas can take a very long time
to be accepted.
Think of the concept of a negative number, or of zero.
Simple to us, but problematic to our ancestors.
Stieg Ostgard, turtle.
If you average out the returns per dollar per year
on trend following managed futures funds,
they're between lousy and negative.
Charlie Munger, 2007 annual shareholder meeting.
Note, Berkshire Hathaway dropped negative 51%
over 2007 to 2009.
The other level of trend following
is something else entirely.
This is the meta level, which sits above the tableau
of material and psychological cause and effect,
allowing participants to observe the behavior
of the markets as a whole and to design intelligent,
premeditated responses to market action.
This is the level of trend following
from which we as traders should and usually do operate.
Stieg Ostgard, turtle.
It may surprise many to know that in my method of trading,
when I see by my records that an upward trend
is in progress, I become a buyer as soon as a stock
makes a new high on its movement.
After having had a normal reaction.
The same applies whenever I take the short side.
Why?
Because I am following the trend at the time.
Jesse Livermore, 1940.
Many professional speculators, including in particular
exponents of the so-called Dow theory,
widely publicized by popular financial journals,
have adopted systems based in the main on the principle
that it is advantageous to swim with the tide.
Alfred Cowles, 1937.
We think that forecasting should be thought of
in the light of measuring the direction of today's trend
and then turning to the law of inertia, momentum,
for assurance that probabilities favor
the continuation of that trend
for an unknown period of time into the future.
This is trend following and it does not require us
to don the garment of the mystic
and look into the crystal balls of the future.
William Dunnegan, 1954.
Conventional capital market theory
is based on a linear view of the world,
one in which investors have rational expectations.
They adjust immediately to information about the markets
and behave as if they know precisely
how the structure of the economy works.
Markets are highly efficient, but not perfectly so.
Inefficiencies are inherent in the economy
or in the structure of markets themselves.
We believe inefficiencies in markets can be exploited
through a combination of trend detection
and risk management.
John W. Henry.
Convergence styles, world-knowable, stable world,
mean reverting, short volatility, arbitrage-based.
Divergence styles, world-uncertain, unstable world,
mean fleeing, long volatility, trend following.
Mark S. Rezebsinski.
Don't be fooled by the calm.
That's always the time to change course,
not when you are just about to get hit by the typhoon.
The way to avoid being caught in such a storm
is to identify the confluence of factors
and to change course even though right now
the sky is blue, the winds are gentle,
and the water seems calm.
After all, look how calm and sunny it is outside.
Thomas Friedman.
The world is flat.
After having experienced a 40% decline
through September 2000, Dunn Capital Management
finished 2000 with a 17.3% asset-weighted composite return.
Dunn's 75.5% gain in the fourth quarter
delivered $590 million to its investors.
Its annualized composite compound return
since the firm's inception over 26 years ago
is now 24.3%.
Question, why didn't Wall Street realize
that Enron was a fraud?
Answer, because Wall Street relies on stock analysts.
These are people who do research on companies
and then, no matter what they find,
even if the company has burned to the ground,
enthusiastically recommend that investors buy the stock.
Dave Barry.
They say patience is a virtue.
For me, patience is synonymous with discipline.
You must have the discipline to know
that markets change and poor periods
are followed by good period.
Longevity in this business, I have seen it again and again,
is measured by discipline.
John W. Henry.
Among the hottest funds this year, 2002,
is Dunn Capital Management, which is up more than 50%.
The firm from Stuart, Florida,
profited on trades on Japan's Nikkei, Germany's DAX,
and Britain's FTSE stock indices,
as well as on bond and Euro dollar interest rate futures.
The thing you have to worry about
is the thing you haven't thought about.
Howard Marks.
The best way I can explain it
is that many investors believe that our returns
were in some way inferior to the returns
of many other hedge fund strategies
because of a perception of higher volatility
and lower absolute returns.
The additional benefits of low correlation,
transparency, liquidity, and effective regulation
somehow escape their attention.
Campbell & Company.
All the intensive research these firms performed
did not protect them or their investors from massive losses.
It is particularly noteworthy that Janus,
whose commercials tout their superior research efforts
and skills, held over 16 million shares.
On April 30th, 2001, the last time it reported
individual fund holdings, 11 Janus funds
collectively owned more than 5% of Enron.
As of September 30th, Janus still owned
more than 5% of Enron.
Another tout of their superior stock picking skills
is the Fidelity family of funds.
As of September 30th, 2001,
together they owned 154 million shares.
So much for the value or research of Janus and Fidelity.
Larry Suedrow.
We don't see things as they are.
We see things as we are.
Anais Nin.
The most damaging consequence of the LTCM episode
is, therefore, the harm done by the perception
that Federal Reserve policymakers do not have the faith
to take their own medicine.
How can they persuade the Russians or the Japanese
to let big institutions fail
if they are afraid to do the same themselves?
UBS said last week it would take a SFR950M
$686M charge, reflecting losses relating
to its equity investments in LTCM,
which was linked to an options deal
that the former Union Bank of Switzerland
had done with the hedge fund
before merging with Swiss Bank Corporation
to create the new UBS.
Last month, August 1998,
during one of the most stressful points
in market performance, our largest portfolio,
Financial and Metals, was up an estimated 17.7%.
Of the $2.4 billion that we manage,
I think just slightly over half of it
is in the financial and metals portfolio.
This was not a direct result
of the decline in the U.S. market.
As I said, we don't trade in the S&P 500,
but rather an example of the typical
predictable investor behavior in the face of trouble.
In reverting to rules of thumb, in this case,
the flight to quality global bonds rose,
global stock markets plunged,
and a shift in foreign exchange rates occurred.
However, the magnitude of the moves
was the only real surprise for us.
The trends which were demonstrated during late August
had been in place for weeks or months beforehand.
John W. Henry.
For most investors, August 1998 was the month from hell.
Not for William Dunn, though.
His firm, Dunn Capital Management,
with $900 million under management,
had one of its best runs in years.
He's up 25.4% so far this year,
and 23.7% in August alone.
There are two kinds of people who lose money,
those who know nothing and those who know everything.
With two Nobel Prize winners in the house,
LTCM clearly fits the second case.
The Fed's intervention was misguided and unnecessary
because LTCM would not have failed anyway,
and the Fed's concerns about the effects
of LTCM's failure on financial markets were exaggerated.
In the short run, the intervention helped
the shareholders and managers of LTCM
to get a better deal for themselves
than they would otherwise have obtained.
One of the former top executives of LTCM gave a lecture
in which he defended the gamble that the fund had made.
What he said was,
look, when I drive home every night in the fall,
I see all these leaves
scattered around the base of the trees.
There is a statistical distribution
that governs the way they fall,
and I can be pretty accurate in figuring out
what that distribution is going to be.
But one day I came home and the leaves were in little piles.
Does that falsify my theory
that there are statistical rules governing how leaves fall?
No, it was a man-made event.
In other words, the Russians, by defaulting on their bonds,
did something that they were not supposed to do,
a once-in-a-lifetime rule-breaking event.
This is just the point.
In the markets, unlike in the physical universe,
the rules of the game can be changed.
Central banks can decide to default
on government-backed securities.
Malcolm Gladwell.
It isn't that they can't see the solution.
It is that they can't see the problem.
G.K. Chesterton.
We make a lot more money trading at the level we do.
The trade-off is volatility.
But if it doesn't cause you to perish,
then you're better off in the long run.
On Wednesday, Nederhofer told investors
in three hedge funds he runs
that their stakes had been wiped out Monday
by losses that culminated from three days
of falling stock prices
and big hits earlier this year in Thailand.
There are so many ways to lose,
but so few ways to win.
Perhaps the best way to achieve victory
is to master all the rules for disaster
and then concentrate on avoiding them.
Victor Nederhofer.
I felt there were very definite economic trends
that were established from knowledge
and the ability to know what events meant.
I was looking for a way to participate
in those major trends when they occurred,
even though they were unexpected.
Bill Dunn.
Victor Nederhofer looked at markets as a casino
where people act as gamblers
and where their behavior can be understood
by studying gamblers.
He regularly made small amounts of money
trading on that theory.
There was a flaw in his approach, however.
If there is a tide, he can be seriously hurt
because he doesn't have a proper fail-safe mechanism.
George Soros.
In statistical terms,
I figure I have traded about two million contracts
with an average profit of $70 per contract.
This average profit is approximately
700 standard deviations away from randomness,
a departure that would occur by chance alone
about as frequently as the spare parts
and an automotive salvage lot
might spontaneously assemble themselves
into a McDonald's restaurant.
Victor Nederhofer.
Nederhofer is an inveterate contrarian.
He feeds off panic,
making short-term bets when prices get frothy.
He condemns the common strategy of trend following,
which helped make his buddy George Soros super rich,
a delusion.
Despite his envy and admiration,
Nassim Taleb did not want to be Victor Nederhofer,
not then, not now,
and not even for a moment in between.
For when he looked around him
at the books and the tennis court
and the folk art on the walls,
when he contemplated the countless millions
that Nederhofer had made over the years,
he could not escape the thought
that it might all have been the result
of sheer dumb luck.
Malcolm Gladwell.
In my opinion, luck is far and away
the most important determinant in our lives.
Various events of infinitesimal probability,
where you are born, to whom you are born,
who you marry, where you take your first job,
which school you choose,
have an enormous impact on our lives.
People tend to deny that luck
is an important determinant.
We like explanations.
For instance, during a basketball game,
there are innumerable random events.
If a guy hits three in a row, he's really hot.
Most of the time, it's random.
Of course, the announcer doesn't want to say,
oh my, another random event.
That's not exciting, so we'll give a reason.
But it is just luck.
Not all of our luck is good,
but there is more good luck behind our performance
that even I like to acknowledge.
Jim Simons.
In the course of the next 12 months,
it became more and more obvious
that other traders were formulating trading strategies
that exploited MG's need to liquidate
its expiring long position.
At the end of each trading month,
as MG tried to liquidate its long positions
by buying the offsetting shorts,
other traders would add their short positions to MG's,
creating the paper market equivalent of a glut in supply
that initially exceeded the number of longs,
driving prices down until the market reached equilibrium.
The combined force of MG's selling its long position
in the prompt contract and other traders
increasing their short positions
was severe downward pressure on crude prices
as the prompt month contract neared expiration.
One of the few things the post-mortem
seemed to have glossed over is the trap
that MG had gotten itself into
by becoming the dominant participant in the futures markets.
By the fall of 1993,
some traders had come to anticipate
the rollovers of MG's positions.
As long as its huge position was in the market,
MG hung there like a big pinata,
inviting others to hit it each month.
The self-entrapping nature of its positions
is what is missing from Edwards and Cantor's
and even Culp and Miller's defenses of MG.
According to the NYMEX,
MG held the futures position equivalent
of 55 million barrels of gasoline and heating oil.
What's one and one and one and one and one and one
and one and one and one and one?
I don't know, said Alice.
I lost count, Lewis Carroll.
The S&P lost 29.6% of its value during the 1987 crash
and took until May 1989 to recover.
EAFE Index, Jaguar, and Quantum Performances
were highly correlated to that of the broad market.
Over the full period, Financial and Metals portfolio
earned nearly 260% on a composite basis.
John W. Henry.
Success demands singleness of purpose.
Vince Lombardi.
A speculative mania is a wonderful thing for our program.
We do as much of that as possible.
Unfortunately, in saying that,
I sound a little bit anti-common man,
man on the street.
What's bad for the general public
is very good for our program.
Toby Crable.
When you have eliminated the impossible,
whatever remains, however improbable,
must be the truth.
Sir Arthur Conan Doyle.
Blaming derivatives for financial losses
is akin to blaming cars for drunk driving fatalities.
Christopher L. Culp.
Big money is made in the stock market
by being on the right side of the major moves.
The idea is to get in harmony with the market.
It's suicidal to fight trends.
They have a higher probability of continuing than not.
Martin Zweig.
It's frightening to think that you might not know something,
but more frightening to think that, by and large,
the world is run by people who have faith
that they know exactly what is going on.
Amos Tversky.
There are three kinds of intelligence.
One kind understands things for itself.
The other appreciates what others can understand.
The third understands neither for itself
nor through others.
This first kind is excellent,
the second good,
and the third kind useless.
Niccolo Machiavelli.
There is no profit-taking, per se.
We only exit on stop losses
because profit-taking would interfere
with the unlimited upside potential we have,
in theory, on every position.
Our stop-loss policy is an actuarial model
that analyzes the probability and consequences
of hitting stops placed at various prices
relative to the current market level.
This allows us to estimate the expected loss
associated with each possible exit point
and hence to construct an optimal liquidation schedule.
Paul Mulvaney.
In Omnia Paratus.
Prepared for all things.
The success of options valuation
is the story of a simple, asymptotically correct idea
taken more seriously than it deserved
and then used extravagantly with hubris
as a crutch to human thinking.
Emmanuelle Derman.
It seems LTCM could have survived
one Nobel Prize winner,
but with two, they were doomed.
Frederick Townsend.
I'd rather be the second person going in the right door
than the first person going in the wrong door.
React is greater than predict.
Larry Tentarelli.
Corporations make good and bad decisions every day,
offers one dealer.
P&G made a bad trading decision,
but if they came in with a pamper's diapers line
that flopped, you wouldn't have hearings
in Congress, would you?
When the mind is in a state of uncertainty,
the smallest impulse directs it to either side.
Terrence, Publius Terentius Afer.


# Chapter 13

CHAPTER 5 THINKING OUTSIDE THE BOX
How to hit home runs! I swing as hard as I can, and I try to swing right through the
ball. The harder you grip the bat, the more you can swing it through the ball, and the
farther the ball will go. I swing big with everything I've got. I hit big or I miss
big. I like to live as big as I can.
BABE ROOF
What is striking is that the leading thinkers across varied fields, including horse bedding,
casino gambling, and investing, all emphasize the same point. We call it the Babe Ruth Effect.
Even though Ruth struck out a lot, he was one of baseball's greatest hitters, Michael
J. Mobison. Since the first edition of Trend Following, sports analytics has exploded.
In the last decade, professional sports have undergone a remodeling, with teams scrambling
to change strategies to accommodate untold new trends in statistical analysis. There haven't
necessarily been major rule changes, nor have there been any substantial changes to the
venues or the equipment. Instead, the Renaissance is rooted in an unconventional process known
as sabermetrics.
Today, every major professional sports team either has an analytics department or an analytics
expert on staff. The popularity of data-driven decision-making in sports has trickled down
to the fans, too, as they are consuming more analytical content than ever. There are now
entire websites dedicated to the research and analysis of sports statistics, for example
FiveThirtyEight.com. The use of analytics has enabled organizations and players to build
a more efficient mousetrap, and it will impact every aspect of high school, collegiate,
and professional sports. From my perspective, the sports analytics revolution also happens
to offer an instructive way for traders to digest Trend Following from an alternate vantage.
Sabremetrics might be the best new illustration for bringing people into the study of numbers
to the exclusion of fundamentals.
Baseball
Baseball has always been a passion of mine. My playing career went from little league
to college for one year, and I've watched more baseball than I care to admit. My childhood
friend, Kevin Gallagher, even made the Houston Astros 40-man roster for a few years in the
1990s. We played and talked baseball on almost every team for ten years as kids, then into
high school and during summers while in college. To this day, I admire from afar,
for example, David Ortiz's 2016 hitting in his last season and at his age forty. Thirty-eight
home runs, forty-eight doubles, one hundred twenty-seven runs batted in, and a three hundred
fifteen batting average. Awesome.
I love this game and the numbers that go with it, and I've known instinctively for
some time that baseball and Trend Following have much in common. But it wasn't until
the revolution, when everyone was acknowledging the numbers, that the similarities truly hit
me. Not surprisingly, this was about the time trend follower John W. Henry bought the Boston
Red Sox. Henry connects baseball and Trend Following in Michael Lewis's Moneyball. People
in both fields, stock market and baseball, operate with beliefs and biases. To the
extent that you can eliminate both and replace them with data, you gain a clear advantage.
Many people think they are smarter than others in the stock market and that the market itself
has no intrinsic intelligence as if it's inert. Many people think they are smarter
than others in baseball and that the game on the field is simply what they think through
their set of images slash beliefs. Actual data from the market means more than individual
perception slash belief. The same is true in baseball.
And as is evident in Trend Following performance data, trend followers like David Harding,
Bill Dunn, and John W. Henry swing for the fence. They hit home runs and performance.
If they coached a baseball team, they would be Earl Weaver, the former manager of the
Baltimore Orioles. He designed his offenses to maximize the chance of a three-run homer.
He didn't bunt, and he had a special taste for guys who got on base and guys who hit
home runs. Ed Zaccotta uses a clever baseball analogy to explain his view of absolute
returns and home runs. When you're up at bat, it doesn't pay to hedge your swing.
True for stocks and true for berry bonds. Lesson, if you are going to play, play hard.
Swing with determination, and if you miss, so be it. You will get another swing.
Babe Ruth, hero of the Yankees, hero of baseball, and arguably one of the greatest sports legends
of all time, was known for his prolific home runs. However, he had another habit not talked
about as much – striking out. In fact, even with a lifetime batting average of 342, he
spent a lot of time going back to the dugout – out. From a pure numbers perspective,
he saw more failure than success. Ruth understood the big home runs helped more than the
strikeouts hurt. He summarized his philosophy.
Every strike brings me closer to the next home run.
Richard Driehaus, a successful trader who has made millions trading trends, backed Ruth.
A third paradigm, pushed in the financial press, is don't try to hit home runs. You
make the most money by hitting a lot of singles. I couldn't disagree more. I believe you
can make the most money hitting home runs, but you also need a discipline to avoid
striking out. That is my cell – discipline. I try to cut my losses and let my winners
run. But swinging for the fences is often characterized
as reckless by the indoctrinated or uninitiated. One trading competitor once said John W.
Henry was Dave Kingman, referring to the ex-ball player famous for either hitting
home runs or striking out. Henry saw talk as unfair. I've been doing
this for 20 years, and every time there's a change in the market, they say I should
change my ways. But every time there's a period when we don't do well, it's followed
by one in which we do extraordinarily well. Henry's multi-decade performance was much
closer to Babe Ruth's than Kingman's. Consider the actual hitting statistics of
Babe Ruth and Kingman. Table 5.1. Babe Ruth vs. Dave Kingman.
At bats, Babe Ruth, 8,399. Dave Kingman, 6,677. Hits, Babe Ruth, 2,873. Dave Kingman, 1,575.
Runs, Babe Ruth, 2,174. Dave Kingman, 901. Home runs, Babe Ruth, 714. Dave Kingman, 442.
Batting average, Babe Ruth, 342. Dave Kingman, 236. Slogging, Babe Ruth, 690. Dave Kingman,
478. Compare the slugging percentages. Kingman
could not be considered a great run producer by any measure. On the other hand, John W.
Henry's performance numbers were consistently outsized. He had a great slugging percentage.
Of course, most want the fantasy, big home runs, but zero strikeouts.
To further illustrate, consider a modern-day example, Blue Collar Joe vs. the Entrepreneur.
Blue Collar Joe is paid the same sum every two weeks, like clockwork. In terms of
winning percentage, Blue Collar Joe is king. His ratio of hours worked to hours paid is
one to one, a perfect 100%. He has a steady job and a steady life. But the security he
feels is an illusion. His paycheck comes at the whim of his local economy, his industry,
and even the foreman of his plant. The pay isn't exactly impressive. It gives him a solid,
livable life, but not much more. In contrast, consider the entrepreneur, the trader or the
trend follower. Paydays are wildly irregular. He frequently goes for months, sometimes years
without seeing tangible reward for his sweat and toil. The winning percentage is, in a
word, pathetic. For every ten big ideas or trades he has, seven of them wind up in the
circular file. Of the remaining three, two of those fizzle out within a year, another big chunk
of time, money, and effort down the drain. However, don't feel too sorry for the poor
entrepreneur or trend trader who spends time losing. He has a passion for life,
he controls his own destiny, and his last idea-slash-trade paid off with a seven-figure check.
Billy Bean. Famed sports agent, Lee Steinberg,
sets the modern sports and numbers stage. Winning in team sports has always been a
function of superior ownership, front offices, and coaching. Decision-making as which players
to draft, trade, develop, coach, and which system to play have traditionally been made by a gut
feeling or adherence to past traditions. But then came Oakland Athletics General Manager,
former ballplayer, Billy Bean. Moneyball made Bean's no fancy stadium,
poor owner story, famous. In fact, his small market team's payroll is miniscule compared to
the Yankees. However, his teams have been some of the best, and they have reached the playoffs a lot.
The philosophy Billy Bean helped unleash has proved almost all the old baseball truisms to be
false. That is, talent, character, chemistry. The genius behind Sabre Metrics was a mechanical
engineer named Earnshaw Cook who, in the early 1960s, compiled reams of data that overturned
baseball's conventional wisdom. However, when he presented the data to executives at struggling
teams, they pushed him away. Cook then wrote a book called Percentage Baseball, based on his
statistical research that was irrefutable. Look closer at Bean's approach to baseball,
and you learn he uses actuarial analysis to determine the odds of a high school pitcher
becoming a major leaguer. And, in drafting and acquiring talent, he relies on those Sabre Metric
truths. For instance, if a team draws a lot of walks and hits a lot of home runs while giving
up few of each, that team will win a lot of ball games. Not surprisingly, Bean has stocked his
team with sluggers who take walks and control pitchers who rarely give up home runs. Bill James.
What Earnshaw Cook started, Bill James took to a deity level. James defined Sabre Metrics as
the search for objective knowledge about baseball. Thus, Sabre Metrics attempts to
answer objective questions about baseball, such as which player on the Red Sox contributed the
most to the team's offense, or how many home runs will Ken Griffey hit next year. It cannot deal
with the subjective judgments, which are also important to the game, such as who was your
favorite player, or that was a great game. Sabre Metrics challenges our perceptions,
which are often misguided from emotional bias. James's enduring work from his 1981 baseball
abstract illustrates his unique take by contrasting sports writing with Sabre Metrics. 1. Sports writing
draws on the available evidence and forces conclusions by selecting and arranging that
evidence so that it points in the direction desired. Sabre Metrics introduces new evidence,
previously unknown data derived from original source material. 2. Sports writing designs its
analysis to fit the situation being discussed. Sabre Metrics designs methods which would be
applicable not only in the present case, but in any other comparable situation. The sports writer
says this player is better than that one, because this player had 20 more home runs,
10 more doubles, and 40 more walks, and those things are more important than a player's 60
extra base hits and 31 extra stolen bases, and besides, there is always defense, and if
all else fails, team leadership. If player C is introduced into this discussion, he is a whole new
article. Sabre Metrics puts into place formulas, schematic designs, or theories of relationships,
which could compare not only this player to that one, but to any player who might be introduced
into the discussion. 3. Sports writers characteristically begin their analysis with
a position on an issue. Sabre Metrics begins with the issue itself. The most overused form
in journalism is the diatribe, the endless impassioned and quasi-logical pitches for
the cause of the day, Mike Norris for the Cy Young Award, Ricky Henderson for MVP,
Gil Hodges for the Hall of Fame, everybody for lower salaries, and let's all line up against
the DH. Sports writing analysis is largely an adversary process, with the most successful
sports writer being the one who is the most effective advocate of his position. Sabre Metrics,
by its nature, is unemotional and non-committal. The sports writer attempts to be a good lawyer,
the Sabre Metician a fair judge. Trend following's connection with baseball picked up major steam when
John W. Henry hired Bill James. James, the consummate outsider, was brought in to statistically
enrich Henry's Red Sox with his number-centric perspective. But James' controversial views are
harsh medicine for old-time baseball professionals. For example, he was blunt in his negative
assessment of Don Zimmer, the former Yankees coach, and others. An assortment of half-wits,
nincompoops, and Neanderthals like Don Zimmer who are not only allowed to pontificate on
whatever strikes them, but are actually solicited and employed to do this. Bad feelings from the
baseball establishment toward James are mutual. A little fat guy with a beard who knows nothing
about nothing is how Hall of Fame manager Sparky Anderson once described James,
who's neither short nor fat. Personalities aside, John W. Henry knew baseball strategy
had to change. Henry was convinced baseball was putting too much emphasis on tools. Baseball
jargon for athletic ability and not enough on performance. The on-the-field success of the
Oakland A's, then the only team using Sabre Metrics, confirmed Henry's view. Henry's first team,
the Florida Marlins, would draft athletes, while the A's would draft baseball players.
Part of the problem, from both Henry and James' perspective, was the old guard's love of an
Adonis athlete over pure production, hitting power and plate discipline. Would you rather have
Tim Tebow, who looks the physical part, or David Ortiz, with a Hall of Fame statistics and
a healthy midsection? To Henry, in both baseball and trend trading, producing must be the goal.
People in both baseball and the financial markets operate with beliefs and biases. To
the extent you can eliminate both and replace them with data, you gain a clear advantage. Many
people think they are smarter than others in the stock market and that the market itself has no
intrinsic intelligence, as if it's inert. Similarly, many people think they are smarter
than others in baseball and that the game on the field is simply what they think it is,
filtered through their set of images and beliefs. But actual data from the market means
more than individual perception or belief, and the same is true in baseball. Stats take over.
Boston Red Sox Nation still debates whether Pedro Martinez should have lifted in the
eighth inning of Game 7 of the 2003 American League Championship Series against the Yankees.
He was left in, and the Yankees rallied from three runs down to win the series. Red Sox
manager Grady Little was blamed for Boston's loss and fired soon thereafter. Many wondered if
he was unfairly scapegoated for a decision others might have made, too. After all,
Martinez was his ace, and the manager's gut told him to stay with his ace.
Perhaps in this situation, Martinez gets through the eighth nine times out of ten. After all,
the percentage of innings in which a pitcher gives up three or more runs is small,
and Martinez was a Hall of Fame pitcher. However, the numbers say leaving him in was
the absolutely wrong decision. After 105 pitches in a given start, his batting average against
rises to 370. He ended up throwing 123 pitches in Game 7. The firing of Grady Little ultimately
was all about numbers. Grady isn't a stats guy, plain and simple. He's an old-school manager who
goes with his gut and defers to his partially-informed conscience when making decisions. Contrast this
with the front office, which has transformed itself into a saber-metric number-crunching machine,
and the divide is clear as day. Fast forward to the eighth inning of Game 7 of the ALCS.
Grady sends Pedro back onto the mound to the surprise of many who assumed he would be
yanked after throwing exactly 100 pitches. Opponents hit 364 off Pedro this year after
his 105th pitch. Even Tony Clark could hit Pedro in the late innings.
The late great Stephen Jay Gould, a numbers man himself, read his fantastic The Median
Isn't the Message about cancer treatments online and lifelong baseball fan, offered
indirect insight into the decision-making process that left Pedro Martinez in.
Everybody knows about Hot Hands. The only problem is that no such phenomenon exists.
The Stanford psychologist Amos Tversky studied every basket made by the Philadelphia 76ers
for more than a season. He found, first of all, that probabilities of making a second
basket did not rise following a successful shot. Moreover, the number of runs or baskets
in succession was no greater than what a standard random or coin-tossing model would predict.
Of course Larry Bird, the great forward of the Boston Celtics, will have more sequences
of five than Joe Airball, but not because he has greater will or gets in that magic
rhythm more often. Bird has longer runs because his average success rate is so much higher,
and random models predict more frequent and longer sequences. If Bird shoots field goals
at 0.6 probability of success, he will get five in a row about once every 13 sequences
– 0.65. If Joe, by contrast, shoots only 0.3, he will get his five straight only about
once and 412 times. In other words, we need no special explanation for the apparent pattern
of long runs. There is no ineffable causality of circumstance, if I may call it that. No
definite reason born of the particulars that make for heroic myths – courage in the
clinch, strength in adversity, etc. – you only have to know a person's ordinary play
in order to predict his sequences. Gould's friend, Ed Purcell, a Nobel laureate
in physics, conducted intense research on baseball streaks. He concluded that nothing
ever happened in baseball above and beyond the frequency predicted by coin-tossing models.
The longest runs of wins and losses were as long as they should be. Had Grady Little
played the numbers, the Red Sox would not have waited until 2004 to finally win the World
Series, which they won again in 2007 and 2013. In fact, the 2016 World Series pitted the
Chicago Cubs against the Cleveland Indians, two very sabermetrics baseball clubs run by
Theo Epstein and Terry Francona, the very two men who most helped John W. Henry win
the 2004 and 2007 World Series. One argument against analytics ten years ago was it would
make baseball boring, but the 2016 playoffs were viewed as very exciting. These teams
were doing things differently, a big reason for the excitement. Plus, the Chicago Cubs won
their first World Championship in 108 years. Now that's a number!
However, let's be clear. This is not only a baseball evolution. Since Billy Bean first started
utilizing statistical predictors, every Major League Baseball team has adopted a copycat
system to an extent. The NFL now hires analytics executives, and the NBA has introduced the most
sophisticated technologies in terms of performance information. Look no further than the NBA's Golden
State Warriors and Stephen Curry. What's really interesting is sometimes in venture
capital and doing startups, the whole world can be wrong, said the team's primary owner,
Joe Lacob, a longtime partner at Silicon Valley venture capital firm Kleiner Perkins Caulfield
and Byers. No one really executed a game plan, a team-building architecture around the three-pointer.
From the beginning of his ownership, Lacob placed unusually strong emphasis on numbers.
Their initial data research yielded many insights, but the Warriors eventually zeroed in on the
three-point line. NBA players made roughly the same percentage of shots from 23 feet as they
did from 24. But because the three-point line ran between them, the values of those two shots were
radically different. Shot attempts from 23 feet had an average value of 0.76 points while 24
footers were worth 1.09. This, the Warriors concluded, was an opportunity. By moving back
a few inches before shooting, a basketball player could improve his rate of return by 43%.
That type of thinking, and what many of these new data sources have in common,
is an emphasis on process. Outcomes, such as strikes, walks, home runs,
three-point shooting, and so forth, are already well tracked. But this new generation of data
allows analysts to understand how those outcomes are generated, perhaps even down to the level
of a player's brain activity. Nonetheless, it will be a fight every step of the way as
curmudgeonly New York Mets manager Terry Collins growled in early 2016. I'm not sure how much
an old-school guy can add to the game today. It's become a young man's game, especially with
all of the technology stuff you've got to be involved in. I'm not very good at it.
I don't enjoy it like other people do. I'm not going to sit there today and look at all these
expletive numbers and try to predict this guy is going to be a great player.
O.P.S. this, O.P.S. that, G.P.S., L.C.S.'s, D.S.D.'s. You know who has good numbers? Good expletive
players. That's just me. I don't have to apologize to anybody.
Ego is a killer. Summary food for thought.
Thinking in terms of odds, finding that edge, is a common denominator for baseball
and trend-following. Bill James
I always admire people who have the courage to confront the conventional wisdom, people within
the system. Those of us on the outside, it's easy for us to say whatever we think, because there are
no consequences to it. It's much harder to say, I think the conventional wisdom is full of beans,
and I'm not going to go along with it when you're inside the system and exposed to the
possibility of actual failure. I think the people who do this drive the world to get better,
whereas the people who snipe at anybody who dares suggest that the conventional wisdom
is malarkey are, in my view, gutless conspirators in the mediocrity of the universe.
Leonard Coppett in A Thinking Man's Guide to Baseball, 1967. Statistics are the lifeblood
of baseball. In no other sport are so many available and studied so assiduously by
participants and fans. Much of the game's appeal as a conversation piece lies in the opportunity
the fan gets to back up his opinions and arguments with convincing figures, and it is entirely
possible that more American boys have mastered long division by dealing with batting averages
than in any other way. Paul Fisher
A passion for statistics is the earmark of illiterate people.
Steven Pinker Cognitive psychology tells us that the
unaided human mind is vulnerable to many fallacies and illusions because of its
reliance on its memory for vivid anecdotes rather than systematic statistics.
Jamis Winston on staying NFL-focused. We're just trying to be 1-0 every week.
It's so easy to think about the future, but it doesn't help you.


# Chapter 14

These are the side margin quotations for Chapter 5.
Lenny—Dykstra—didn't let his mind mess him up. Only a psychological freak could
approach a one hundred mile per hour fastball aimed not at all that far from his head with
total confidence. Lenny was so perfectly designed, emotionally, to play the game of baseball.
He was able to instantly forget any failure and draw strength from every success. He had
no concept of failure. Moneyball. Failure is not fatal, but failure to change might be.
John Wooden.
The general complacency of baseball people, even those of undoubted intelligence, toward
mathematical examination of what they regard properly and strictly as their own dish of
tea is not too astonishing. I would be willing to go as far as pretending to understand why
none of four competent and successful executives of second-division ball clubs were most reluctant
to employ probabilistic methods of any description, but they did not even want to hear about
them.
Earnshaw Cook.
Life is too dynamic to remain static, John W. Henry.
Even before he trained with legend Richard Dennis, Jim DeMaria had learned an important
trading principle in the less lucrative arena of baseball statistics. The players who score
the most runs are home run hitters, not those with consistent batting records. It's
the same with trading. Consistency is something to strive for, but it's not always optimal.
Trading is a waiting game. You sit and wait and make a lot of money all at once. The
profits tend to come in bunches. The secret is to go sideways between the home runs,
not lose too much between them. What kind of people are getting rich these days? People
like John W. Henry. That is, people on the nerdly end of the spectrum who have
a comfort with both statistical analysis and decision-making in an uncertain environment.
Michael Lewis.
When John W. Henry purchased the Boston Red Sox, he understood that a combination of good
management and hard science was the most efficient way to run a major league baseball team. As
a trend follower, Henry had been exploiting market inefficiencies for decades. Michael
Lewis.
When I started writing, I thought if I proved X was a stupid thing to do that people
would stop doing X. I was wrong.
Bill James.
There is a core of institutional investment managers, primarily in Europe, who manage billions
of dollars for clients, who have waited for me to fail for more than twenty years. They
have an inherent bias against the notion that data or mechanical formulas can lead
to success over time in markets. They have personally watched my success now for more
than twenty years. Yet, if anything, they are now no more convinced than they were twenty
years ago that I am going to be successful in the future using data over analysis. I
am not legendary on Wall Street or off. Bill James is, and I assume the inherent bias
against him within baseball will increase now that he has taken sides.
John W. Henry.
John W. Henry knew a dispassionate statistical investigation could be used to help shape
a baseball team. It is remarkably similar. I just happen to apply quant to an area that
is extremely lucrative.
The nature of markets is to trend. The nature of life is to trend.
John W. Henry.
I feel I have had an advantage over the years because I am clear about a couple
of things. It is part of the nature of life itself to trend, and I will never have a
complete or full understanding of anything. Therefore, all investment decisions should
be based on what can be measured rather than what might be predicted or felt.
John W. Henry.
For nearly twenty-five years, there has been a huge food fight in baseball. The argument
was basic. How do you evaluate a player? On one side were general managers, scouts,
and managers. For the most part, they evaluated players the old-fashioned way, with their
eyes, stopwatches, and radar guns, and by looking at statistics which were popularized
in the nineteenth century. Their mindset was always, how fast does he run? How hard does
he throw? What's his batting average? Does he look like a major leaguer should look?
On the other side, led by statistical gurus such as Bill James and Pete Palmer, and assisted
by countless lesser seamheads, including at times me, were the geeks, the outsiders,
mere fans, who thought they knew better.
Thomas Boswell. The Washington Post.
It's like any field. There's a vested interest in maintaining the status quo so you don't
have to learn anything new. Rob Nair. ESPN.
I had learned something from publishing Moneyball. I learned that if you look long enough for
an argument against reason, you will find it. Michael Lewis.
When Grady Little let Pedro continue pitching into the eighth in Game 7 of the ALCS against
the Yankees, he provided the perfect demonstrator of why the Red Sox fired him after his second
winning season in Boston. Little explained his move, which allowed the Yankees to tie
and eventually win after the game. We trained him to work just like that deep into a game.
When he tells me he has enough in the tank to keep going, that's the man I want out
there. That's no different than what we've done the last two years. In fact, the
Bats said just the opposite. Pedro pitched into the eighth only five times in his 29 regular
season starts and simply didn't pitch well after he'd thrown 100 pitches, the number
he'd tossed before taking the mound in the eighth. In fact, during 2003, opponents batting
averages went up 139 after Pedro tossed his 105th pitch, strong evidence that he'd continue
to weaken. That it would turn out badly was likely, as most everyone knew, and as the
Red Sox computers knew. Jack Lambert couldn't get on the field as a backup linebacker. The
kid in front of him was really their leader, kind of the heart and soul of the Kent State
defense. Through a series of circumstances, the kid dropped out of school and went to
work for Mick Jagger. He was his security guy on tour with the Stones, and Lambert
became the starting middle linebacker. He probably would have never played had that
not happened. And you have a Hall of Fame player. Sometimes things take a turn and then once
some players get that opportunity and they get in there, the Tom Brady's of the world
or whoever, you can't get them out of there, like Lou Gehrig, Bill Belichick, October
2016, New England Patriots press conference. Sabre Metrics is an unlikely marriage between
mathematicians and jock culture. The truth of a theory is in your mind, not in your eyes.
Albert Einstein.


# Chapter 15

6. Human Behavior
Human nature never changes, therefore the stock market never changes. Only the faces,
the pockets, the suckers, and the manipulators, the wars, the disasters, and the technologies
change. The market itself never changes. How can it? Human nature never changes, and human
nature runs the market—not reason, not economics, and certainly not logic. It is our human
emotions that drive the market, as they do most other things on this planet.
Jesse Livermore, 1940.
We are not really interested in people who are experts at the French stock market or
German bond markets, due to the technical nature of the trading. It does not make a huge monster
infrastructure. Neither Harvard MBAs nor people from Goldman Sachs. I would hate it if the
success of Chesapeake was based on my being some great genius. It's the system that
wins. Fundamental economics are nice, but useless in trading. True fundamentals are always unknown.
Our system allows for no intellectual capability. Jerry Parker.
Trend following is as much about observing and understanding human behavior as it is
about moving averages, breakouts, and position sizing. Understanding human behavior and
how it relates with markets is commonly referred to as behavioral economics or behavioral finance.
We evolved from the contradiction between classical economic theory, EMT, and reality.
The assumption people act rationally, have identical values and access to information,
and use rational decision-making is one preposterous assumption. However, trend following strategies
only work if price trends continue. But why should trends continue? If prices initially
underreact to either good or bad news, trends tend to continue as prices slowly
move to fully reflect changes in fundamental value. These trends have the potential to continue
even further as investors herd or chase trends. Herding can cause prices to overreact and move
beyond fundamental value after the initial underreaction. Naturally, all trends must eventually
end, as deviation from fair value cannot continue infinitely. Said another way, people are irrational
as hell and seldom make rational decisions even if they think they do. That's not my one-man opinion,
either. I have had the good fortune to learn from and interview the top minds in the field of
behavioral economics and finance, including Nobel Prize winners Daniel Kahneman and Vernon Smith,
Dan Ariely, Colin Kammer, Christopher Shabrie, Robert Caudini, Kay Anders Erickson, Gergigorenzer,
Donald McKenzie, Spiro Smokridakis, Terence O'Deen, Steven Pinker, Laurie Santos,
Hirsch Chefren, Daniel Simons, Paul Slovic, Dieter Sornett, Mayor Stadtman,
Brett Steenbarger, and Philip Tetlock to name a few of the best minds in the field.
You can find these interviews on my podcast at www.trendfollowing.com slash behavior.
You can see their contributions to the academic nomenclature, confirmation bias,
sunk cost fallacy, availability heuristic, attentional bias, frequency illusion, anchoring,
contrast effect, clustering illusion, insensitivity to sample size, neglect of probability,
anecdotal fallacy, halo effect, ingroup bias, curse of knowledge, illusion of transparency,
and hindsight bias, to name a few of hundreds. I believe you can also see their work and all
these assorted biases conceptualized inside systematic trend following strategy. I have yet
to see another rules-based approach that tackles EMT's deficiencies head-on while giving credence
to the behavioral school and then tying it all together with irrefutable proof in the form of
month-by-month track records going back literally decades. Prospect theory. Investment bubbles have
always been a part of human market history. For example, seventeenth-century speculators
in the Netherlands drove prices of tulip bulbs to such absurd levels, some bulbs were priced
more than houses. The inevitable crash followed. Since then, from the Great Depression to
the dot-com implosion to October 2008, investors can't and will never steer clear of manias.
They repeatedly make the same mistakes over and over. Daniel Kahneman, who was the first
psychologist to win the Nobel Prize in economics, see my podcast episode 212, attributed market
manias to investors' illusion of control, calling the illusion prospect theory. He studied
the intellectual underpinnings of investing, how traders estimate odds and calculate risks,
to prove how often people act from the mistaken belief they know more than they do. Kahneman
and his associate, Amos Tversky, found a typical person acts on what they christened the Law
of Small Numbers, basing broad predictions on narrow samples of data. For instance, if
you buy a fund that's beaten the market three years in a row, you become convinced it's
on a hot streak. People are unable to stop themselves from overgeneralizing the importance
of a few supporting facts. Limited statistical evidence satisfies, no matter how inadequate
the depiction of reality. They also determined people dislike losses so much they make irrational
decisions to avoid them. This helps explain why some investors sell winning stocks too
early, but hold on to losers too long. It is human nature to take the profit from
a winner quickly, on the assumption it won't last for long, while sticking with a loser
and the feudal hope it will bounce back. Trend following by design knows if you don't
cut your losses, if you don't exit with a small loss, loss will grow like a cancer.
And the more you struggle with your small loss, unable to accept it, the larger it
will become and the harder it will be to deal with it in the future, if you are still
solvent by then. The problem with accepting a loss is it forces
people to admit they are wrong. Human beings don't like being wrong, ego rules decision
making. Accordingly, a discussion of why investors
are their own worst enemies starts with sunk costs. A sunk cost is a cost that has already
incurred that you can't recoup, one you don't get back. Thinking in sunk costs lets
you see a loss for what it is, a loss. Although sunk costs should not influence
present decisions, humans have a hard time letting go. An investor might buy more of
a stock even though it is tanking because of their initial decision to buy it. I am right.
That investor archetype can then say proudly, I bought on a discount. Now, if the price
of the stock never goes up again, as is so often the case, his theory implodes with
a concrete lesson of a big loss. Take your small loss and go home is the
trend following piece de resistance. However, too many market players are ambivalent
when dealing with sunk costs. Although intellectually people know there is nothing they can do about
money already spent and they should move on, emotionally people dwell and worry, literally
their whole lives. An experiment with a $10 theater ticket demonstrates
the irrationality of sunk costs. Kahneman told one group of students to imagine they
have arrived at the theater only to discover they have lost their ticket. Would you pay
another $10 to buy another ticket? A second group was told to imagine they were going
to the play but hadn't bought a ticket in advance. When they arrive at the theater,
they realize they have lost a $10 bill. Would they still buy a ticket?
In both cases the students were presented with essentially the same simple question.
Would you want to spend $10 to see the play? 88% of the second group, which had lost the
$10 bill, opted to buy the ticket. However, the first group, the ticket losers, focusing
on sunk costs, tended to ask the question in a different way, am I willing to spend
$20 to see a $10 play? Only 46% said yes. This wide spectrum of market behaviors and
biases that guarantee losses is endless. These behaviors, the antithesis of trend following,
include lack of discipline. It takes an accumulation of knowledge and sharp focus to trade successfully.
Many would rather listen to the advice of others than learn for themselves. They are
lazy when it comes to the education needed for trading. To quote Fox Mulder's office
poster in The X-Files, I want to believe. Impatience. The human mind has an
insatiable need for action. It might be the adrenaline rush or the gambler's high.
Proper trading, however, is about patience and objective decision-making, not action-addiction.
No objectivity. The inability to disengage emotionally from the market kills investors,
literally. Losers in the market marry positions. They have no prenuptial agreement with the
market. Greed. The quick money types aim to pick tops or bottoms in the hope they'll
be able to time trades to guarantee profits. Their desire for quick profits blinds them
to the real hard work for winning. Refusal to accept truth.
Media types can't believe truth is price action. As a result, they follow every other
fundamental variable, an impossibility, setting the stage for inevitable losses.
Impulsive behavior. Gamblers often jump into a market based on the morning paper's lead.
But by the time news has been published, markets have discounted it. Thinking if you act quickly,
somehow you will beat everybody else and the great day-trading high-frequency race
is the grand recipe for your failure. Inability to stay in the present.
You can't spend your time thinking about how you're going to spend your profits. Trading
because you have to have money is the state of mind that keeps you from ever finding the goal.
False parallels. Just because the market behaved one way in 1995 or 2015 does not mean a similar
pattern today will give the same result tomorrow. There is little doubt if you try to bridge the
gap between the present and the future with your market predictions, you will be in a continual
state of uncertainty whether you admit it or not. Scientists have investigated the impact of
extended uncertainty. The conclusion? People react the same way to uncertainty that other
animals do when faced with a threat, shifting into fight-or-flight mode. Some don't like that
fatalistic conclusion as it leaves them feeling like cognitive cripples. Yet unlike the animal's
environment where the threat passes quickly one way or another, human lives are spent in
constant stressful situations, many of which never go away or ever arrive. According to
neuroscientist Robert Sapolsky, human beings, unlike other animals, can and often do experience
stress by imagining stressful situations. For 99% of the beasts on this planet, stressful
situations include about three minutes of screaming terror, after which the threat
is over or you are over. Humans turn on the exact same stress response thinking about
30-year mortgages. Yet while thinking about a mortgage is not life-threatening, the stress
is probably going to last much longer than three minutes. The biggest public health problem
in the developed world 50 years from now will be depression. Traders not prepared for
the inevitability of loss will become depressed when they lose money. They will look everywhere
except inside, blaming others or events to avoid taking responsibility for their actions.
Instead of understanding their own emotional state, they chase easy bucks and holy grails
to avoid real thinking. It's a cat chasing its tail while running in circles. You see,
some want more money but feel guilty about admitting those true feelings. A few have
lots of money but want even more and feel guilty. Take a moment to think through your
motivations for trading. If you have any reason for trading other than to make money,
find something else to do, get a dog, whatever, and avoid the stress. There is nothing good
or bad about money. Money is a tool, nothing more, nothing less.
Ayn Rand articulates nonjudgmental and rational attitudes about money.
You think that money is the root of all evil? Have you ever asked what is the root of money?
Money is a tool of exchange, which can't exist unless there are goods produced and
men able to produce them. Money is the material shape of the principle that men
who wish to deal with one another must deal by trade and give value for value. Money is not
the tool of the moochers who claim your product by tears or of the looters who take it from you
by force. Money is made possible only by the men who produce. Is this what you consider evil?
Human behavior should reflect a rational approach to money. People are supposed to
refuse to pay too much for a watch because of the social cachet of a label,
but they still pay. They are supposed to make intelligent, objective choices that maximize
wealth and financial security, but they don't. Then what is the motivation behind someone who
runs up credit card debt at 25% interest but would never think of dipping into savings to
pay off that debt? What is the explanation for people who spend time researching a new car or
designer kitchen but when it comes time to invest they refuse to learn and then trust some
kid banker fresh out of college with their life savings? Cognitive dissonance is in play.
Some problems run deeper, springing from limiting, unconscious beliefs. For instance,
a trader who has labeled himself a one-four trader or who learned as a child the biblical story,
it's easier for a camel to pass through the eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter the
kingdom of God, may subconsciously sabotage his trading to respect his beliefs. They're deeply
ingrained in us. But if all ethical people think money is bad, who's going to get the money?
David Harding knows deep in his bones the need for proper risk thinking in all of life. At the
University of Cambridge he created a professorship to help improve people's understanding of the
mathematics of risk. Questions requiring a scientific ability to assess the chances
of something happening, or not happening, arise all the time. Here are some examples.
Following the poisoning of the Russian ex-spy Alexander Litvin Yanko,
traces of Polonium 210 were found at various locations in London he had visited. Statistically,
how probable is it that someone who visited the same locations at a later stage would
contract radiation poisoning? An apparently healthy woman is judged to be at risk of breast
cancer and is advised to undergo a mastectomy. Should she do so? A person has to cross a main
road to reach a few shops. Should he walk straight across the road or use an available
footbridge instead? How sensible would it be for me to invest in the stock market today?
Might delaying improve my prospects greatly? A 29-year-old man decides to marry his girlfriend
of three years. What is the chance he will meet a more suitable partner at a later stage?
As these examples show, risks must be considered in the most ordinary of situations and high
pressure environments alike. But always be careful to not torture the statistics as a
form of confirmation bias. Note, my Gurd Gigarenzer podcasts, episodes 193 and 295,
offer more on this topic. Emotional Intelligence. People want to believe if they are able to
discern patterns, count cycles, etc., they will win. As a result, they are constantly
making connections and drawing parallels not there. They miss seeing the evidence staring
back. Ironically, the real pattern they miss is the pattern of acting with complete confidence
to make decisions, right or wrong, in the face of the unknown. The less personal confidence,
the more frustrating and demoralizing experiences will be. The more you learn about the markets
and yourself, the more confidence unfolds. The greater your confidence, the more effective
you become as a trader. Psychologist Daniel Goleman's bestseller,
Emotional Intelligence, is a powerful case for broadening the meaning of intelligence
to include emotions. Drawing on brain and behavioral research, Goleman demonstrated why
people with high IQs often flounder, while people with modest IQs often do extremely
well. The factors that influence how well people do in life include self-awareness,
self-discipline, intuition, empathy, and an ability to enter the flow of life. Character
traits most traders would not consider particularly useful for garnering profits from the markets.
Being self-aware also means understanding what you want out of life. You know what your
goals and values are, and you are able to stick to them. For example, if you are offered
a high-paying job that doesn't square with your values or your long-term goals,
you turn it down promptly and without regret. If an employee breaches corporate ethics, you
deal with it instead of making a half-hearted response because you are pretending it won't
happen again. However, Goleman is not saying you should repress your feelings of anxiety,
fear, anger, or sadness. You must acknowledge and understand your emotions for what they are.
Like animals, biological impulses drive emotions. There is no way to escape them,
but you can learn to self-regulate your feelings and, in doing so, manage them.
Self-regulation is the ongoing inner conversation emotionally intelligent engage in to be free from
being prisoners of their feelings. If you are able to engage in such a conversation,
you still feel bad moods and emotional impulses as everyone else does,
but you can learn to control them and even to channel them in useful ways.
A trend-follower's ability to delay gratification, stifle his impulsiveness,
and shake off the market's inevitable setbacks and upsets makes him not only a successful trader,
but a leader. Goleman found effective leaders all have high degree of emotional intelligence along
with the relevant IQ and technical skills. While other threshold capabilities were entry-level
requirements for executive positions, emotional intelligence was the sine qua non of leadership.
Without emotional intelligence, someone can have superior training, an inclusive
and analytical mind, and infinite creativity, but still won't be a great leader.
However, few people live or trade in a vacuum. That sense of being cut off from the world is
a common consequence for modern man. This doesn't necessarily mean you need a group of colleagues
to hang out with around the water cooler, but objectivity comes from having a balanced
life and that means making sure you don't sit at your screen alone 24-7. Who needs or
wants to sit there like that anyway? Neuro-linguistic programming.
One of the reasons Richard Dennis and Richard Donchian have been able to teach trend-following
is found in the field of neuro-linguistic programming, NLP. Top NLP teacher Charles
Faulkner sees how to gain the mental edge. NLP's techniques involve moving out of negative
mental beliefs and replacing them with positive ones. Think of an unpleasant trade as you do
that. What happens if you take a breath and go, ah, push it out and then trade with it?
Much better. People go through fifths of scotch trying to get that feeling. When you
get agitated go, whoosh, and just step out of it that way and you'll find it's less.
Do it again and you'll be at zero real fast. I first met Faulkner at a trading seminar
in 2001. He has the natural gift for explanation. He urges traders to take matters into their own
hands and to believe, I am competent to be confident. I know what's going on in these
markets. If I don't, I get out. I found Faulkner's Swiss skiing example
to be especially insightful. He noted until the 1950s, most thought skiing was a matter
of natural talent that you had or you didn't have. Then films were made of some of Europe's
greatest skiers to identify the movements that characterized them. It was found that
all had certain techniques in common. All kinds of people could learn to be good skiers if
the movements that made a great skier and the essence of their skills could be identified
to be taught to others. This essence of skills was called a model, and the model, or set
of basic principles, could be applied to any endeavor.
Trading Tribe Ed Secoda has served as a teacher and mentor
to hundreds of traders in his Trading Tribe, a global network of groups of traders who
meet to work through challenges. The Trading Tribe is an association of traders who commit
to excellence, personal growth, and supporting and receiving support from other traders.
Secoda's tribe works on the psychological and emotional issues crucial to successful
trading—and life, for that matter. Faulkner relays a story about his finely honed
intuition. I am reminded of an experience that Secoda shared with a group. He said when
he looks at a market that everyone else thinks has exhausted its uptrend, that is
often when he likes to get in. When I asked him how he made this determination, he said
he put the chart on the other side of the room, and if it looked like it was going
up, then he would buy it. Of course, this trade was seen through
the eyes of someone with deep insight into the market behavior.
Secoda doesn't pretend to have all the answers, but he is extremely good at turning
the mirror back on students so they focus on the self. His precision with language forces
one to pay attention. One of his students broke down his teachings into breathing exercises.
For me, an immediate connection to yoga and meditation. The mind is a filter, letting
only some information in. When you're designing systems or setting stops, it's
an ever-present part of what you do. My goal is to get in touch with those subconscious
processes. A lot of what Secoda does is a breathing technique to achieve an altered
state of consciousness where you somehow relax your conscious filters. We did it both unstructured
and in a structured way, with ideas to concentrate on such as, Why do I always do this when
I'm trading? I am nearly five years into my yoga practice.
If you have never tried it, please do. In my experience, it is my single best tool to
declutter the mind. You may also enjoy my podcast episode with
Andy Putticum, number 261, a meditation expert. More bullet point insights from my conversations
with Secoda, podcast episodes number 208 and 355.
One use of the Trading Tribe Process, TTP, is to locate and dissolve the feelings that
stand between you and following your system. When you notice all things happen now and
when you take responsibility for your experience, you notice that even noise results from your
intention. At that point, you can clarify your intention and remove the noise.
The entire length of the chain of events exists in the ever-evolving moment of now,
and at all points of now, you might choose to see your result equals your intention. Alternatively,
you might choose to avoid responsibility, especially for the noise, and then try to
find exogenous causes. Analysis leads to solving and fixing. TTP
leads to dissolving and noticing things already work right.
Incontrovertible solvers tend to use TTP as an analytical tool, until they happen
to experience a desire to solve things. Take responsibility for your experience and
see intentions equal result. Deny responsibility and a delta between intentions
and results may appear. Your real trading system is the set of feelings
you are unwilling to experience. In tracking your feelings and in tracking
the markets, take whatever comes up and go with it.
Trying to force a feeling is like trying to force a market. You might find some joy in
the process of allowing feelings and markets to come and go as you experience them.
It might seem counterintuitive that a successful trader would spend significant time delving
into feelings, but Sakota is blunt. It is a dominant idea in Western society that
we should separate emotion and rationality. Advances in science show that such a separation
is not only impossible but also undesirable. Many legendary trend followers have known
about these advances in science for fifty years. I wonder if they should have also been
awarded Nobel Prizes for prospect theory because their track records are the single
best market examples of the theory in action. Curiosity, not PhDs.
Try and recall what it was like to experience simple, childlike curiosity with no agenda
other than to know. The curiosity I'm talking about is open-ended
and enthusiastic. Kids have wide-eyed wonderment when they take apart their first toy to figure
out how it works. Emotional issues aside, many traders remain
fixated on academic intelligence as their only path to get to the top.
William Eckhart, co-father of the turtles, knows their energies are misplaced.
I haven't seen much correlation between good trading and intelligence.
Some outstanding traders are quite intelligent, but a few are not.
Many outstandingly intelligent people are horrible traders.
Average intelligence is enough. Beyond that, emotional makeup is more important.
When it comes to being an outstanding trader, emotional intelligence, EQ, is as important
as IQ. Shoot, let's face it, it's way more important.
When people are conditioned to appear book-smart, they're afraid to be curious, afraid to fail.
They think by asking questions they'll be perceived as ignorant, although in truth,
by not questioning the world, people get into even more trouble, that is, lose money.
Still, the issues for others might be more nuanced. They don't fear the question, but
fear the answer. Yet the answer might be the information that
requires a legitimate integration into your life, or it might prove you dead wrong.
Open-ended curiosity lets you take a step back and see everything for what it is right
now in the moment of now. However, like clockwork, many spend time listening
to someone feed information or instruct them. They are judged on how well they can regurgitate
information back to whomever offered it. When it comes time to take responsibility for
decision-making, too many are waiting for someone to lead them. Curiosity has been lobotomized
from the masses. Government father figures provide comfort and safety, even if they
are artificial and unreliable. For example, in the book Memos from the
Chairman, Ace Greenberg told his then-employees, Our first desire is to promote from within.
If somebody with an MBA degree applies for the job, we will certainly not hold it against
them. But we are really looking for people with
PSD, poor, smart, and a deep desire to be rich degrees. They built this firm, and
there are plenty around because our competition seems to be restricting themselves to MBAs.
Recall the 2008 Wall Street Escapade. All of the so-called best and brightest traders,
those armed with Ivy League educations and Goldman Sachs pedigrees, they imploded only
to be bailed out by the government. They played by the rules their whole life.
They went to the right schools. They were at the right investment banks. They had fabulous
TVs back to first grade. They were rewarded for playing the role, but then 2008 hit. I
am sure many went back to school for an MBA or PhD in the hope if they could learn more
rules then it would be okay. But ignoring opinions and contributions of
others to be right is not particularly pleasing behavior, as Charles Faulkner notes. One
doesn't have to be a student to want to please people or want to be right. I would
claim serious students and professors know there is much they don't know and are less
interested in what is right. On the other hand, those that know little often feel the need
to be in the right about it. People pleasing is an entirely different dimension, though
people that need to be right are usually experienced at ignoring others and, therefore, failing
to please them. Sigmund Freud goes to the heart of curiosity
imbalances. What a distressing contrast there is between the radiant intelligence of the
child and the feeble mentality of the average adult. As simplistic as it sounds, maintaining
childlike wonder and enthusiasm keeps mental doors open for fresh insights. It is very
possible to disengage your ego and think of yourself as still evolving, but there will
be some heavy lifting on your end. Commitment
You must be committed to winning. If you don't want to win and don't have it deep
in your gut, there's a good chance you don't have a snowball's chance in hell to win.
Commitment to trend-following trading is the same commitment you would make to any
new endeavor in life. If you are committed to excellence, you will figure it all out
one way or another. No commitment? Then you lose. Pony up to the bar for a pint and kavec.
For example, if you are trying to be a pro baseball player, you keep pushing. You never
give up. By the time you get to the major leagues, it was years of work. However,
the only reason you have that outcome is because you made the commitment at the outset
to win. Everyone wants the big leagues and big money, but most are not committed to
making it happen with relentless drive. Charles Faulkner, always seeking to tone me
down, sees it differently. I see it more as a matter of choosing between what is in accord
with your nature or changing your nature to accord with your dreams. Most people don't
recognize this as a choice point. Few realize it is possible to hold dreams constant and
vary behavior until they are good at what they need to be good at, and usually there
is a bit of both. If you are going to chase success, the basic principles, the basic
psychological requirements are the same, no matter what you do in life. You still have
to wake up every day with a deep desire to be successful. You have to be consistently
focused every day, day after day. You can't wake up and say, I'm going to give a little
bit of effort today and see what happens. If it doesn't work out for me, I can
say I tried and complain to my wife or girlfriend. You can't jump helter-skelter because the
newspaper or some journalism student posing as a market analyst blurts out, here's the
get-rich-quick scheme for today. That's not the real way achievement works.
Behave like that and you will fail. Consider simple trading do-nots from Amos
Hostetter, the wise sage of famed trend-following incubator Commodities Corporation.
Don't sacrifice your position for fluctuations. Don't expect the market to end in a blaze
of glory. Look out for warnings. Don't expect the tape to be a lecturer. It's enough to
see that something is wrong. Never try to sell at the top. It isn't wise.
Fail after a reaction if there is no rally. Don't imagine that a market that is once sold
at $150 must be cheap at $130. Don't buck the market trend. Don't look for the breaks.
Look out for warnings. Don't try to make an average from a losing game. Never keep goods
that show a loss and sell those that show a profit. Get out with the least loss and
sit tight for greater profits. Hostetter also saw the dangers inherent in human nature.
Fearful of profit and one acts too soon. Hope for a change and the forces against one.
Lack of confidence in one's own judgment. Never cease to do your own thinking. A man
must not swear eternal allegiance to either the bare or bull side. An individual fails
to stick to facts. People believe what it pleases them to believe.
Imagine those simple rules were handed out in January 2008 to every investor with their
life savings in index funds, mutual funds, etc. Hostetter was telling you how to avoid
October 2008 long before it ever happened. Interestingly, one of Commodity's Corporation's
founders was Paul Samuelson, the Nobel Prize winner. In 1965, Samuelson published a version
of the efficient markets hypothesis that described, a world in which all reliably predictable
events are priced right and only surprises would remain. Only surprises would remain?
That is the textbook definition of an elephant in the room. I wonder if WikiLeaks has the
secret documents with passive indexer proponents on record giving their creative rationalizations
to Barry Samuelson's 1965 surprise insight. But Samuelson was no dummy. He had his 1970s,
80s, and 90s fortune in Commodity's Corporation's trend following system, the utilitarian named
TCS, Technical Computer System, and he made a bloody fortune from it. Samuelson gave credit
where credit was due to trend following. Amos Hostetter was the most remarkable investor
I ever knew. Summary food for thought. Kaizen. Anfangen ist leichst. Beharan ein Kunst.
Grit loved the grind. Sam Carpenter, for too many of us slowing down to examine things
is not entertaining, and that's too bad because it is mandatory that we understand
the machinery of our lives if we are to modify that machinery to produce the results we want.
Peter Thiel. One of the things that's striking about talking to people who are politically
working in D.C. is, it's so hard to tell what any of them actually do. It's a sort
of place where people measure input, not output. You have a 15-minute monologue describing
a 15-page resume, starting in seventh grade. Winners take responsibility. Losers place blame.
You tell everybody, listen to me, Hatcher. You've got to tell them. Soylent Green is people.
We've got to stop them somehow. Who is John Gault?


# Chapter 16

These are the side-margin quotations for Chapter 6.
Simple, robust solutions are easier to find than robust people or firms willing to apply
them.
JASON RUSSELL
There is an old Hindu saying, The world is as we are.
Are you tired of seeing the condition of the world around you?
Start by changing yourself.
Be the change you want to see in the world.
Be what you want to attract more in your life.
Being loving to yourself is the fastest way to enjoy a more fun and productive life.
CHARLES POLICQUIN
History does not repeat itself.
People keep forgetting it.
No matter how many stock market bubbles there have been or will be, investors and their advisors
always treat the current one as permanent, sometimes even calling it a new era.
In the meantime, others, myself included, have abandoned all hope of people permanently
remembering the lessons of history.
To be a good trader, you need to trade with your eyes open, recognize real trends and
turns and not waste time or energy on regrets and wishful thinking.
ALEXANDER ELDER
Knowing others is wisdom.
Knowing their self is enlightenment.
Mastering others requires force.
Mastering self needs strength.
LAU TSU
Plenty of people are motivated by external factors such as a big salary or the status
that comes from having an impressive title or being part of a prestigious company.
By contrast, those with leadership potential are motivated by a deeply embedded desire to
achieve for the sake of achievement.
DANIEL GOLMAN
NLP is short for Neuro-Linguistic Programming.
The name sounds high-tech, yet it is purely descriptive.
Neuro refers to neurology, our nervous system.
The mental pathways our five senses take which allow us to see, hear, feel, taste and smell.
Linguistic refers to our language ability, how we put together words and phrases to express
ourselves, as well as how our silent language of movement and gestures reveals our states,
thinking styles and more.
Programming, taken from computer science, refers to the idea that our thoughts, feelings
and actions are like computer software programs.
When we change those programs, just as when we change or upgrade software, we immediately
get positive changes in our performance.
We get immediate improvements in how we think, feel, act and live.
CHARLES FOCKNER
Fat, drunk and stupid is no way to go through life, son.
DEAN WARMER ANIMAL HOUSE
Self-knowledge keys.
1.
Know what you want.
Know who you are, not who you think you should be.
This gives you the power to pursue what really feeds your soul and the belief that you deserve
it.
2.
Know the cost of getting what you want.
Realize the trade-offs of every choice.
People often think if they are clever, they can make choices without experiencing any downside.
Any road you choose means there is a road you won't experience.
3.
Be willing to pay the cost.
People often try to negotiate to win a choice without cost.
Every choice involves a price.
We get to decide what cost we want to pay.
It may readily be conceived that if men passionately bent upon physical gratifications desire greatly,
they are also easily discouraged.
As their ultimate object is to enjoy, the means to reach that object must be prompt
and easy or the trouble of acquiring the gratification would be greater than the gratification itself.
Their prevailing frame of mind, then, is at once ardent and relaxed, violent and enervated.
Death is often less dreaded by them than perseverance in continuous efforts to one end.
Alexis de Tocqueville
You see, Dr. Stadler, people don't want to think, and the deeper they get into trouble,
the less they want to think.
But by some sort of instinct they feel that they ought to and it makes them feel guilty.
So they'll bless and follow anyone who gives them a justification for not thinking.
Ein Rand
Over-familiarization with something, an idea, say, a method or an object, is a trap.
Creativity requires something new, a different interpretation, a break from the twin opiates
of habit and cliche.
Denise Shakurjan
When popular opinion is nearly unanimous, contrary thinking tends to be most profitable.
The reason is that once the crowd takes a position it creates a short-term, self-fulfilling
prophecy.
But when a change occurs, everyone seems to change his mind at once.
Gustave La Bonne
Walk into the college classroom and you will hear your professors teaching your children
that man can be certain of nothing, that his consciousness has no validity whatsoever,
that he can learn no facts and no laws of existence, that he is incapable of knowing
an objective reality.
Ein Rand
I model human excellence.
Charles Faulkner
Reason is the main resource of man in his struggle for survival.
Ludwig von Mises
What feels good is often the wrong thing to do.
William Eckhart
My life has stopped, but I continue to age, deadpans Karen Levine, a Wharton School
MBA who has worked at General Mills, G.I.S., Unilever, Deloitte Consulting, Conde Nast,
and Hearst.
But in real terms, Levine made more in 1988 fresh out of Harvard College than she
earns today.
During her two years of battling unemployment, Levine worked for eight dollars an
hour at Pottery Barn and for eighteen dollars an hour as a temp for a Wall Street
trading firm.
I can't even afford a dog.
The illiterate of the twenty-first century will not be those who cannot read
and write, but those who cannot learn, unlearn, and relearn.
Alvin Toffler
Human beings never think for themselves, they find it too uncomfortable.
For the most part, members of our species simply repeat what they are told and
become upset if they are exposed to any different view.
The characteristic human trait is not awareness but conformity.
Other animals fight for territory or food, but uniquely, in the animal
kingdom, human beings fight for their beliefs.
The reason is that beliefs guide behavior, which has evolutionary importance
among human beings.
But at a time when our behavior may well lead us to extinction, I see no
reason to assume we have any awareness at all.
We are stubborn, self-destructive conformists.
Any other view of our species is just a self-congratulatory delusion.
Michael Crichton
Having an education is one thing.
Being educated is another.
Lee Kuan Yew
Former Prime Minister of Singapore
When teaching children, a good chess teacher devises ways to get students
through the pain of losing, since they lose a lot when first learning the
game.
By learning how to handle defeat, the young students can learn how to win.
Anyone with average intelligence can learn to trade.
This is not rocket science.
William Eckhart
Never call an intuition.
It calls on you.
A top CEO recently spoke before a Harvard MBA class.
After his presentation, the students asked questions.
One of the questions was, what should we do?
The CEO replied, Take the rest of the money you have not spent on tuition and do something
else.
We delude ourselves that we proceed in a rational manner and weight all of the pros and cons
of various alternatives.
But this has seldom the case.
Quite often, I decided in favor of X is no more than, I like to X.
We buy the cars we like, choose the jobs and houses we find attractive, and then justify
these choices by various reasons.
Focus on the moment, not the monsters that may or may not be up ahead.
RYAN HOLIDAY
The strategies of human reason probably did not develop in either evolution or any single
individual without the guiding force of the mechanisms of biological regulation of which
emotion and feeling are notable expressions.
Moreover, even after reasoning strategies become established in the formative years, their
effective deployment probably depends, to a considerable extent, on the continued ability
to experience feelings.
If you try to impose a rigid discipline while teaching a child or a chimp, you are working
against the boundless curiosity and need for relaxed play that make learning possible
in the first place.
Learning cannot be controlled.
It is out of control by design.
Learning emerges spontaneously.
It proceeds in an individualistic and unpredictable way, and it achieves its goals in its own good
time.
Once triggered, learning will not stop, unless it is hijacked by conditioning.
Roger Fouts


# Chapter 17

CHAPTER VII. DECISION MAKING
Would you tell me, please, which way I have to go from here?
That depends a good deal on where you want to go," said the cat.
LEWIS CARRELL
We see heuristics as the way the human mind can take advantage of the structure of information
in the environment to arrive at reasonable decisions.
GERD GIGORENZER.
Trend following strategy approaches day-to-day trading decisions in a way most would not
recognize, KISS.
For example, each day millions of fundamental traders around the world attempt to evaluate
a relentless onslaught of confusing, contradictory, and overwhelming market information, all to
hopefully make profitable trading guesses for that day, for example, the type of information
on daily finance news.
Although they know decisions should be educated and, based on factual data, they see impulsive
action as sound decision-making, leaving them with absolutely no clue.
They either end up paralyzed and make no decision, let someone else decide or guess.
It's a vicious and repeating cycle of decision-making frustration.
Terrence O'Deen, a professor at the University of California, Berkeley, uses a roulette wheel
to illustrate.
He postulates that even if you knew the results of the last ten thousand roulette spins,
knew what materials the roulette wheel is made of, and whatever hundred other pieces
of information you could dream up as possibly being useful, you still will not know what
matters.
Where the ball will land next.
Ed Zaccotta takes O'Deen's thought a step further in critiquing decision-making.
While fundamental analysis may help you understand how things work, it does not tell you when
or how much.
Also, by the time a fundamental case presents, the move may already be over.
Just around the recent high in the live cattle market, the fundamental reasons include Chinese
buying, mad cow disease, and the Atkins diet.
Trend followers excel because they control what they know they can control.
They know they can choose a level of risk.
They know they can estimate volatility.
They know the transaction costs.
However, there is still plenty they know they do not know, but in the face of that uncertainty,
they still step up to the plate and swing.
That ability to make a decision is core to trend-training philosophy, that is, swinging
the bat without fear.
Those decision-making skills might not appear worthy of endless discussion, but the philosophical
framework of that decision-making is critical to execution.
If we were to keep the trend-following style in baseball terms, the question would be,
do you want to play ball or not?
When the pitch comes, if it's your pitch, swing the bat.
There is no time to wait for more information before you swing.
In an uncertain world, if you wait until the data is clear, the ball has crossed
the plate, you miss the pitch.
You are out!
Occam's Razor
Having the challenge of making smart decisions in a complicated market world is hardly new.
As far back as the fourteenth century, when medieval life was as rigidly complex as its
cathedrals, philosophers grappled with how to make simple decisions when pressed for time.
In any scientific realm, especially when a new set of data requires the creation of
a new theory, many hypotheses are proposed, studied, and rejected.
But even when all unfit hypotheses are thrown out, several might remain.
In some cases they reach the same end but have different underlying assumptions.
To choose among similar theories, scientists and trend traders, use Occam's Razor.
Occam's Razor is a principle attributed to logician and Franciscan friar, William
of Occam.
The principle states entities must not be multiplied unnecessarily.
In its original Latin form, Occam's Razor is pluralitas non est ponenda sine necessitate.
This bit of Latin still underlies all scientific modeling and decision making.
A common interpretation of the principle is the simplest of two or more competing theories
is preferable.
Occam's Razor does not guarantee the simplest solution will be correct, but it
focuses priorities, fast and frugal decision making.
In the field of cognitive science, economics, and trading, it has always been assumed the
best decision makers have the time and ability to process vast amounts of information.
Not true.
The field of heuristics explores how to make constructive, positive choices by simplifying
processes.
Gerd Gigarenzer's Simple Heuristics That Make Us Smart shows how to cope with complexities
using the simplest of decision making tools.
His premise?
Fast and frugal heuristics employ a minimum of time, knowledge, and computation to make
adaptive choices in real environments.
For example, a component of fast and frugal heuristics is one reason decision making.
This is what trend followers do when faced with a trading decision.
One reason decision makers use only a single piece of information for making a decision.
This is their common building block.
Therefore, they can also stop their search as soon as the first reason is found that
allows a decision to be made.
Whether your decisions are about life in general or trading in particular, your decision
making process should not be complex for the sake of complexity.
You make the trading decision, buy or sell, on a single piece of information of price.
The great trend traders share character traits with other achievers across other fields such
as quick reactions or being able to turn a position on a dime.
When you are faced with a decision, going with a first instinct is almost always the
right choice.
If you reflect and consider options and alternatives or try to second guess, you will end up making
the wrong decision or the same right decision, but only after taking valuable time to get
there.
Giga Renzer elaborates, fast and frugal heuristics can guide behavior in challenging domains
when the environment is changing rapidly.
For example, in stock market investment, when the environment requires many decisions to be
made in a successively dependent fashion.
These particular features of social environments can be exploited by heuristics that make rapid
decisions rather than gathering and processing information over a long period during which
a fleet or mind competitor could leap forward and gain an edge.
Consider how players catch, like in baseball.
It may seem they would have to solve complex differential equations in their heads to predict
the trajectory of the ball.
In fact, baseball players use a simple heuristic.
When a ball comes in high, the player fixates on the ball and starts running.
The heuristic is to adjust the running speed so the angle of gaze remains constant.
That is, the angle between the eye and the ball.
The player can ignore all the information necessary to compute the trajectory, such as the ball's
initial velocity, distance and angle, and focus on one piece of information, the angle
of gaze.
Former baseball catcher Tim McCarver drew the same conclusion, and he is in no way
a trained decision-making scientist.
Before each delivery, the catcher flashes a hand signal to the pitcher indicating the
best pitch to throw.
Imagine that a strong batter faces a count of three balls and two strikes, with runners
on first and third.
What should the hurler serve up?
A fast ball high and inside, a slider low and away, or a change-up over the heart of
the plate?
By the way, Mark Maguire is up next.
You have to put down a sign quickly.
The first one is going to be the right one.
For most baseball decisions, you can train yourself to be right quicker than in five
minutes.
McCarver is talking about bare bones decision-making with incomplete information.
Be quick is his central tenant.
The transition from fast and frugal decision-making by a baseball player, McCarver, to fast and
frugal decision-making by a baseball team owner and trader, John W. Henry, is remarkably
smooth.
Henry was one of the first to focus on the use of heuristics in trading.
At the New York Mercantile Exchange, the president of John W. Henry's firm talked fast
and frugal.
We're a trend follower.
We use price information and volatility in order to make decisions.
The reason why we do that is because we don't think we can predict the future.
Further, I can't be an expert in every one of them markets.
In fact, I can't be an expert in any of them, so what I have to do is be able
to be an expert at being able to move faster when I see information that's important.
So my way in which I can move faster is to just use the price information that's the
aggregation of everyone's expectation.
What we try to do is extract the appropriate signals as quickly as possible so we can act
fast to limit our risk and also create opportunities.
We're frugal in the senses that we use.
Very simple recognition heuristics, the price information itself.
What could be an example of this?
We like to think of those as nonlinear models, but it's no different than what some people
describe as breakout systems.
His simple heuristic for making trading decisions is price action, but there is more.
Finding a price trend among noisy, random price moves presents a challenge similar to
that of filtering information from the noise in many other applications, such as astronomy,
audio, ballistics, image processing, and macroeconomics.
For example, engineers who track ballistic missiles based on noisy radar information
attempt to filter out noise to determine the missile's direction.
Similarly, macroeconomists and central bankers who receive imperfect economic data, such as
estimates of GDP for countries and unemployment rates collected from many sources with errors,
try to assess whether an economy is heading into a recession or is overheating.
Investors trading on trends in financial markets face the similar challenge of assessing the
direction prices are headed by filtering noisy price data.
In the world of audio, Ray Dolby developed the Dolby system to reduce noise in music
recordings and enhance the signal that the listener hears.
Along the same lines, trend followers use quantitative tools to enhance the signal of the price trend
and reduce the noise around it.
The use of quantitative tools does not mean complicated analysis.
The fewer trading decisions traders make, the better.
This may seem counterintuitive, but in a complex world where decisions have to be made
with limited information and real-world time constraints, time to consider all possible
alternatives is not an option.
Trend following is inherently simple, but very few want to believe, especially many
respected market players, that something simple can make money consistently.
The reason trend followers do well is because they stay focused and very disciplined.
They execute their game plan, and that is their real strength.
Not everyone agrees with the science of fast and frugal heuristics.
One group said, this can't be true, it's all wrong, it could never be replicated.
Among them were financial advisors, who certainly didn't like the results.
Another group said, this is no surprise, I knew it all along, the stock market's
all rumor, recognition, and psychology.
However, staying exclusively with the simple heuristic of price is tricky.
Traders can't help trying to improve.
They become impatient or even bored with systems.
Far too many like to make decisions, even if those decisions are short-term
emotional fixes that have zero to do with making a profit.
For example, let's say you have a buy signal for Google.
You must buy the stock if it follows rules.
You must trust the rules and your decision making to follow the rules.
Don't make it more complicated than it is.
Buy when you get the signal.
That's not to say the trend following in its entirety is elementary.
However, the decisions that go along with it should be processes you can
jot out on the back of a napkin.
Innovator's Dilemma.
Clayton M. Christensen, author of The Innovator's Dilemma,
understands trend following, even if not by the name I use.
What Christensen understands are odds and reactions.
He saw this as readers attempted to decipher his work.
They were looking at Innovator's Dilemma for answers rather than for understanding.
They were saying, tell me what to do,
as opposed to help me understand so I can decide what to do.
Wall Street analysts are theory-free investors.
All they can do is react to the numbers.
But the numbers they react to are measures of past performance,
not future performance.
That's why they go in big herds.
Wall Street professionals and business consultants have enshrined as a virtue
the notion you should be fundamental data-driven.
That is the root of companies inability to take action in a timely way.
Christensen drives home again that you must make decisions without all the facts.
You cannot foresee how a changing market will look until change has taken place
and then it's too late.
Take, for example, an up-and-down stock such as Yahoo.
You probably said, I should have bought here and sold there,
but there was no way you could have predicted the future of Yahoo.
You could only act early before the direction of the trend was obvious.
You must be in ready-set-go mode long before pundits say the coast is clear.
They are the herders, Christensen slams, those in the sheep business.
Consider another decision-making story similar to Tim McCarver's baseball example.
Years ago, the catcher in the pitcher called pitches.
Today, you still have a catcher in a pitcher,
but the coaches are usually calling the pitches.
Why?
So the pitcher can execute exactly what he's told to do.
When the typical Major League pitcher gets a signal to throw a curveball,
he doesn't stand out there on the mound debating it.
He says to himself, this is the system we're using.
I have a coach on the sidelines with a computer.
He's studied and charted everything.
He knows I should throw a curveball.
The only thing I'm going to worry about right now
is throwing the curveball to the precise location that I'm supposed to throw it.
The pitcher then can concentrate solely on execution,
the best pitch possible he can throw right now.
Likewise, as a trend follower, you wake up and
see the market move enough to cause you to take action, like a buy signal.
For example, let's say the rule dictates buy at price level 20.
You do it.
You don't debate or second-guess it.
Sure, that might feel boring and it might feel like you're not in control.
It might feel like there should be something more exciting,
more adrenaline-fueled, more fun for you to do.
In which case, consider a trip to the Spearmint Rhino in Vegas.
If you want to win, however, you execute the signal as prescribed.
That means you trade at price level 20 and
throw the curveball when called for by the coach.
Fun, excitement, and glamour are not what you want.
Executing correctly to win is what you want.
Process versus outcome versus gut.
The decision-making process is that, a process.
You can't make decisions based on what you want the outcome to be.
Michael Mobison has long presented a compelling argument for process.
In too many cases, investors dwell solely on outcomes without appropriate
consideration of process.
The focus on results is to some degree understandable.
Results, the bottom line, are what ultimately matter.
And results are typically easier to assess and
more objective than evaluating process.
But investors often make the critical mistake of assuming that good outcomes
are the result of a good process, and that bad outcomes imply a bad process.
In contrast, the best long-term performers in any probabilistic field,
such as investing, sports team management, and
para-mutual betting, all emphasize process over outcome.
Building on that wisdom, Edward Rousseau and Paul Shoemaker,
professors in the field of decision-making at Wharton,
present a simple tool, see figure 7.1 in the supplemental PDF,
to map out the process versus outcome matrix.
The process versus outcome schematic, shown in figure 7.1,
is built into trend trading systems.
For example, imagine the process you use to make a decision is sound.
If your outcome happens to be good, you can view your result as deserved.
On the other hand, if you use a good process and your outcome turns out bad,
you take solace with failure as a bad break, but
you achieved it with a good process.
Trend trader Larry Hight put it another way.
There are four kinds of bets.
There are good bets, bad bets, bets that you win, and bets that you lose.
Winning a bad bet can be the most dangerous outcome of all,
because a success of that kind can encourage you to take more bad bets in
the future, when the odds will be running against you.
You can also lose a good bet, no matter how sound the underlying proposition.
But if you keep placing good bets over time,
the law of averages will be working for you.
That's sage advice from one of my favorite thinkers.
But the romance of in the moment, no process,
gut decision making remains a strong pull in for modern world.
From admiration of entrepreneurs and firefighters,
to the popularity of books by Malcolm Gladwell and Gary Klein,
to the outcomes of the last two US presidential elections.
Instinct over process is positioned as ascendant.
Many push intuition as the x-factor separating men from the boys.
Gut decisions, they say, are needed in moments of crisis when,
they say, there is no time to weigh arguments or
calculate the probability of every outcome.
Gut decisions are made in situations, they say,
where there is no precedent and consequently little evidence.
There is a place for gut decision making in life choices,
but it's not applicable to the markets.
If you have no market process and focus on profit outcomes alone,
it will end badly, guaranteed.
Summary, food for thought.
Ed Zekota, one pretty good heuristic is trade with the trend.
Occam's razor dictates if two equal solutions, pick the simplest.
Fearless decision makers have a plan and execute.
They don't look back.
If something changes, they adjust.
Murray N. Rothbard.
If a formerly good entrepreneur should suddenly make a bad mistake,
he will suffer losses proportionately.
If a formerly poor entrepreneur makes a good forecast,
he will make proportionate gains.
The market is no respecter of past laurels, however large.
Capital does not beget profit.
Only wise entrepreneurial decisions do that.
Tom Asacker, the process, not the proceeds.


# Chapter 18

These are the side margin quotations for Chapter 7.
Any individual decisions can be badly thought through and yet be successful or exceedingly
well thought through but be unsuccessful, because the recognized possibility of failure
in fact occurs. But over time, more thoughtful decision-making will lead to better overall
results.
Robert Rubin.
People who make decisions for a living are coming to realize that in complex or chaotic
situations, a battlefield, a trading floor, or today's brutally competitive business
environment, intuition usually beats rational analysis. And as science looks closer, it is
coming to see that intuition is not a gift, but a skill.
Nature operates in the shortest way possible. Aristotle.
Euristic. Serving to discover, using trial and error, teaching by enabling pupil to find
things out. Oxford Dictionary.
We could still imagine that there is a set of laws that determines events completely for
some supernatural being who could observe the present state of the universe without disturbing
it. However, such models of the universe are not of much interest to us mortals. It seems
better to employ the principle known as Occam's razor and cut out all the features of the
theory which cannot be observed.
Stephen Hawking.
I'm increasingly impressed with the kind of innovation and knowledge that doesn't
come from preplanned effort or from working towards a fixed goal, but from a kind of concentration
on what one is doing. That seems very, very important to me. It's the actual process,
the functioning, the going ahead with it.
J. Kirk T. Barnodeau. Museum of Modern Art, New York City.
Heart, guts, attitude, and the ability to tolerate uncertainty are core to long-term
planning. Michael Covell. To be uncertain is to be uncomfortable, but to be certain
is to be ridiculous. Proverb.
Leaving the trees could have been our first mistake. Our minds are suited for solving
problems related to our survival, rather than being optimized for investment decisions.
We all make mistakes when we make decisions. James Montier. Most people believe that great
chess players strategize by thinking far into the future, by thinking ten or fifteen
moves ahead. That's not true. Chess players look only as far into the future as they
need to, and that usually means thinking just a few moves ahead. Thinking too far ahead
is a waste of time. The information is uncertain. The situation is ambiguous. Chess is about
controlling the situation at hand.
The 2016 study, The Enduring Effect of Time Series Momentum on Stock Returns over Nearly
100 Years, provides evidence that supports the view that time series momentum, also referred
to as trend following, is one of the few investment factors that meets five important
criteria for inclusion in a portfolio. Specifically, it is persistent, pervasive, robust, investable,
and intuitive. Their study covered the eighty-eight-year period from 1927 to 2014. Many are looking
for highly complex ways of interacting with the markets, when most of the time it's only
the simple ones that are going to work. Charles Faulkner.
Everything should be made as simple as possible, but not simpler. Albert Einstein. The Greek
philosopher Arculicus tells us, The fox knows many things, but the hedgehog knows one
great thing. The fox, artful, sly, and astute, represents the financial institution that
knows many things about complex markets and sophisticated marketing. The hedgehog, whose
sharp spines give it almost impregnable armor when it curls into a ball, is the financial
institution that knows only one great thing. Long-term investment success is based on simplicity.
John C. Bogle. When the mind is exhausted of images, it invents its own. Gary Snyder.
Always do whatever's next. George Carlin. Confine yourself to the present. Marcus Aurelius.


# Chapter 19

CHAPTER VIII. THE SCIENTIFIC METHOD.
An interviewer asked Anne Rianne, Carl Sagan's wife,
Didn't Sagan want to believe? She responded. He didn't want to believe. He wanted to know.
First Principles Clarisse, read Marcus Aurelius. Of each particular thing ask, What is it in
itself? What is its nature? Hannibal Lecter.
Great trend followers approach trading as science and their foundation is the scientific
method. At best they view the world like physicists, and the following physics definition is dead-on
applicable to trading success. The science of nature, or of natural objects, that branch
of science which treats of the laws and properties of matter and the forces acting upon it, especially
that department of natural science which treats of the causes that modify the general properties
of bodies, natural philosophy. Excellence in physics or trend following requires a solid
grounding in numbers. Both disciplines work off models that describe relationships and
their common language, math, is finite. Physics and trend following thus work best when they
constantly test models with real-world applications. Trading your money necessarily means dealing
with numbers and varying quantities, like a physics experiment. But the connection goes
deeper. Physics is at its core about developing mathematical models of our world. Those models
may describe different types of complexity, such as the movement of molecules in a gas,
or the dynamics of stars in a galaxy. And it turns out similar models can be applied
to analogous complex behavior in financial markets. When I use the term science of trading,
it is not a reference to the engineers or scientists who develop elegant and complex academic models
prone to fragility. Trend following is in the anti-fragile headspace. Keeping it
simple is hard, because it is hardest to do what is obvious. Famed physicist, Nobel
Prize winner and Manhattan Project scientist, Richard Feynman, beautifully sums up the
needed mindset in his classic 1960s lecture. In general, we look for a new law by the following
process. First, we guess it. Audience laughter. No, don't laugh. That's really true. Then
we compute the consequences of the guess to see what, if this is right, if this law
we guess is right, to see what it would imply, and then we compare the computation
results to nature, or we say compare to experiment or experience, compare it directly with observations
to see if it works. If it disagrees with experiment, it's wrong. In that simple statement
is the key to science. It doesn't make any difference how beautiful your guess is.
It doesn't matter how smart you are, who made the guess, or what his name is. If
it disagrees with experiment, it's wrong. That's all there is to it."
He added,
It is much more likely that the reports on flying saucers are the result of the known
irrational characteristics of terrestrial intelligence, rather than the unknown rational efforts
of extraterrestrial intelligence. It's just more likely, that's all. And it's
a good guess. We always try to guess the most likely explanation, keeping in the back
of our mind that if it doesn't work, then we must discuss the other possibilities.
Trend followers, like physicists, approach the investing landscape with an open mind.
They examine experiment and A-B test to find solid ground. Like physicists, they think
critically and develop the ability to ask the right questions including digging deep to
face the real problem, instead of mindlessly going for the easy superficial query, being
completely honest regarding the real reason you might want an answer, discovering how
to interpret information before asking the question, in other words, questions that offer
the opportunity to make a mid-course correction, facing cold, hard facts about human nature,
facing the reality of where the new answer might lead, facing subjective takes on the
world and factoring in objective data, seek questions that engender important details
that might be missed because people did not ask.
Charles Faulkner prioritized his favorites. The questions that are most critical, in both
senses of that word, are the ones that question our assumptions, our assumptions of what is
or is not a fact or a truth or possible. After this comes questions that assist statistical
thinking. You must be determined to know what is real. You do not avoid asking a
question if you are suspicious you might not like the answer. You do not ask self-serving
questions that reinforce an opinion you already have. You do not ask mindless questions or
accept mindless answers. You are content to ask questions knowing there might not be an
answer. This is not an easy process for the masses. Most go the wrong way every time.
The questions become superficial and ill-informed because they have not taken ownership. Instead,
they ask dead-end questions. Is this going to be on the test? Their questions demonstrate
a complete lack of desire to think. They might as well be sitting in silence with minds
on pause. To think critically, you must want to stimulate your intellect with questions
that lead to more questions. You must undo the damage previous traditional rote memorization
schooling has done to your curiosity. You need to want to resuscitate your mind.
Chaos theory dictates a non-linear universe. Our world does not move in a straight line.
Spending your time looking for perfect is an exercise in futility. The future is unknown
no matter how educated the fundamental forecast. Manus J. Donahue III, author of An Introduction
to Chaos Theory and Fractal Geometry, paints a picture of our chaotic non-linear world.
The world of mathematics has been confined to the linear world for centuries. That is to say,
mathematicians and physicists have overlooked dynamical systems as random and unpredictable.
The only systems that could be understood in the past were those that were believed to be
linear, that is to say, systems that follow predictable patterns and arrangements. Linear
equations, linear functions, linear algebra, linear programming, and linear accelerators
are all areas that have been understood and mastered by the human race. However,
the problem arises that we humans do not live in an even remotely linear world. In fact,
our world must indeed be categorized as non-linear. Hence, proportion and linearity is scarce.
How may one go about pursuing and understanding a non-linear system in a world that is confined
to the easy, logical linearity of everything? This is the question that scientists and
mathematicians became burdened with in the 19th century. Hence, a new science and mathematics
was derived, chaos theory. Although a non-linear acceptance is new from many,
it is not a new principle inside trend-following trading. The big events, such as the 2008 market
crash or Brexit 2016, are examples of non-linear events. Trend-following won during these events
because it's built to expect the unexpected. Lack of linearity or cause and effect was not
unanticipated. How did trend-following manage this preparation for events no one could predict?
What set it apart is that trend-following, deep down, is statistical thinking.
Gerd Gigeränzer notes the power of statistical thinking. At the beginning of the 20th century,
the father of modern science fiction, Herbert George Wells, said in his writings on politics,
if we want to have an educated citizenship in a modern technological society,
we need to teach them three things, reading, writing, and statistical thinking.
At the beginning of the 21st century, how far have we gotten with this program? In our
society we teach most citizens reading and writing from the time they are children,
but not statistical thinking. One of my favorite examples of
statistical thinking is a case study involving the birth ratio of boys and girls. There are
two hospitals. In the first one, 120 babies are born every day. In the other, only 12.
On average, the ratio of boys to girls born every day in each hospital is 50-50. However,
one day in one of those hospitals, twice as many girls are born as boys.
In which hospital was it more likely to happen? The answer is obvious to numbers thinking,
but as research shows, it's not so obvious for the untrained. It is much more likely to happen in
the small hospital. The probability of a random deviation of a particular size from the population
mean decreases with the increase in the sample size. Statistical puzzles about birth and gender
tie directly to trend following. Take two traders who on average win 40% of the time,
with winners being three times as large as losers. One has a history of 1,000 trades,
and the other has a history of 10 trades. Who has a better chance in the next 10 trades to
have only 10% of total trades turn out as winners instead of the typical 40%? The one
with the 10 trade history has the better chance. More trades in a history mean a greater
probability of adhering to the average. Fewer trades mean a greater probability of deviation
from the average. Consider a friend who receives a tip and makes quick money. He tells everyone
about his newfound trading prowess. You are impressed. But you would be less impressed
if you were a statistical thinker because you would realize immediately his population
of tips was extremely small. He could as easily follow the next great stock tip and blow up.
One tip means nothing. The sample is too small. The difference between these two views is
why great trend followers have grown from one-person shops to firms that routinely beat
the so-called Wall Street powerhouses. Why did Wall Street sit by and allow trend
traders to enter and dominate arenas they could and perhaps should have dominated?
The answer lies in Wall Street and Main Street's fascination with benchmarks.
Wall Street is after index-like performance, benchmarks, because their clients think they
can avoid risk and control return. Fantasies die hard. Whereas trend following is focused
on absolute performance. Monthly calendars be damned. On the other hand, large, established
Wall Street firms grounded in EMT judge success with measures of central tendency. The large
banks and brokerages view an average measure, mean, and the variation from average to determine
whether they are winning or losing. They are beholden to investors' irrational desires.
The trend following mindset is counter to their entire business model.
They go in wrong directions with their volatility understanding. Volatility around the mean,
standard deviation, is the de facto Wall Street risk definition. Typical Wall Street
types, long-only types, aim for consistency instead of absolute returns. As a result,
returns are average by design. They worship the normal distribution.
Normal distributions are the bedrock of finance, including the random walk, capital asset pricing,
value at risk, and Black-Scholes models. Value at risk, VAR models, for example, attempt to
quantify how much loss a portfolio may suffer with a given probability. While there are
various forms of VAR models, a basic version relies on standard deviation as a measure of
risk. Given a normal distribution, it is relatively straightforward to measure standard deviation
and hence risk. However, if price changes are not normally distributed, standard deviation
can be a very misleading proxy for risk. The problem with standard deviation as a risk
measurement is seen when two traders have similar standard deviations but show an entirely
different distribution of returns. One might look like the familiar normal distribution
or bell curve. The other might show statistical characteristics known as kurtosis and skewness.
In other words, the historical pattern of returns does not resemble a normal distribution.
Trend following never has and never will produce returns that exhibit a normal distribution.
It will never produce consistent average returns that hit benchmarks quarter after quarter.
When trend followers hit home runs in the zero-sum game and when huge profits from the
likes of Bearings Bank, long-term capital management, and the 2008 market crash, they
are targeting the edges or those fat-tails of a non-normally distributed world.
Jerry Parker, the most successful of the train turtles. The way I describe it is that
overlaying trend following on top of markets produce a non-normal distribution of trades.
And that's sort of our edge. In these outlier trades, I don't know if we have an inherent
rate of return, but when you place this trend following on top of markets it can
produce this distribution, the world is non-normal. Jean-Jacques Chennier, like Parker,
knows markets are far less linear and efficient than the typical view. Remember,
not everyone across markets plays to win. Some might be hedgers, playing to lose,
using the markets as insurance. The Bank of Japan will intervene to push the yen lower.
A commercial bank in Japan will repatriate yen assets overseas just to window dress its
balance sheets for the end of the fiscal year. These activities create liquidity,
but it is inefficient liquidity that can be exploited. To better understand Parker's words,
it helps to break down the concepts of SKU and kurtosis. SKU measures the statistical
likelihood of a return in the tail of a distribution being higher or lower than
commonly associated with a normal distribution. For example, a return series of negative 30%,
5%, 10%, and 15% has a mean of 0%. Only one return is less than 0%, whereas three are higher,
but the one that is negative is much farther from the mean, 0%, than the positive ones.
This is called negative skewness. Negative skewness occurs when the value to the left of,
less than, the mean are fewer, but farther from the mean than the values to the right of the
mean. Positive skewness occurs when the values to the right of, more than, the mean are fewer,
but farther from the mean than the values to the left of the mean.
Trend following exhibits a positive SKU return profile. Kurtosis, on the other hand,
measures the degree to which exceptional values, much larger or smaller than the average, occur
more frequently, high kurtosis, or less frequently, low kurtosis, than in normal,
bell-shaped distribution. High kurtosis results in exceptional values called fat tails, which
indicate a higher percentage of very low and very high returns than would be expected with
a normal distribution. SKU may be either positive or negative and affects distribution symmetry.
Positive SKU means there is a higher probability for a significant positive return than for a
negative return the same distance from the mean. SKU will measure the direction of surprises. Outliers,
or extremes in performance, not normally associated with a distribution, will clearly affect skewness.
The crash of 1987 is usually considered an extreme outlier. For example, a positive outlier will
stretch the right-hand tail of the distribution. Because this method eliminates losing positions
and holds profitable positions, historically, there has been a tendency for positive outliers
and a higher chance of positive returns. A negative SKU results in a higher probability
of a significantly negative event for the same distance from the mean. These concepts
are not as entertaining as listening to the latest Money Honey paraded out by finance shows
to serenade sweet nothings, literally nothings. Few see the use for statistical thinking when
they can trust a hot model to think for them. If you forget these money-making basics, you will
never see the reality great trend following traders see, the reality of making a fortune
when the next black swan arrives. Compounding. Jim Rogers' Investment Biker was one of my first
Wall Street books. He brought so much passion and common sense to the table. Nearly fourteen years
later, in early 2008, I interviewed him for my first documentary film, Broke, at his home
in Singapore. My Rogers visits never stopped. I saw him in 2014 and 2016 too. Even though
I had been up for nearly forty-eight hours straight, going around the world does take
twenty hours in the air, when I did the interview, the classic money-making lessons
were on the table. Rogers, who is not a technical trend following trader, but who has
made a fortune trading trends, put the importance of compounding at the top of his list. One of the
biggest mistakes most investors make is believing they've always got to be doing something. The
trick in investing is not to lose money, the losses will kill you. They ruin your compounding
rate, and compounding is the magic of investing. You can't get rich overnight, but with a proper
compounding perspective, you at least have the chance to make big money over a lifetime.
For example, if you manage to make fifty percent a year in your trading, you can compound an
initial twenty thousand dollar account to over six hundred sixteen thousand dollars in seven
years. Is fifty percent unrealistic? Perhaps. However, do the math again using twenty-five
percent. You can be a trend follower, make twenty-five percent a year, and spend all of
your profits each year. Or, you can apply trend following and possibly compound your twenty-five
percent a year for twenty or more years and become filthy rich. Look at a hypothetical
investment of twenty thousand dollars. See Table 8.1 in the supplemental PDF.
A trend example further illustrates the point. In October 1997, David Harding launched his
Winton Futures Fund, which provided investors with annualized returns of twenty-one percent
per year for his first ten years. To put that in context, if you had been the buyer
of Vincent van Gogh's Irises in 1947, you would have paid eighty thousand dollars. The next
time it changed hands in 1987, it was bought for fifty-three point nine million dollars.
This seems like a huge increase in value. But, mathematically, it's a compounded average
annual growth rate of seventeen point seven percent, which is less than the annualized
returns in Harding's fund. The acceptance of compounding math is not intuitive in a
world focused on prediction hocus pocus, instant gratification, and tweets by the
bushel. However, if there is evidence trend following thrives and flourishes in a
compounded nonlinear world, and there is, it's worth considering the specific
people, operations, and philosophies religiously at work against wider
acceptance. Summary, Food for Thought.
Donald Rumsfeld. Reports that say that something hasn't happened are always
interesting to me, because as we know, there are known knowns, there are things
we know we know. We also know there are known unknowns, that is to say, we know
there are things we do not know. But there are also unknown unknowns, the
ones we don't know we don't know. And if one looks throughout the history of
our country and other free countries, it is the latter category that tends to
be the difficult ones. If you can't think in numbers, don't play the game.
The edges of the bell curve are opportunity. Probable events are not
always certain, and extremely improbable events are not always impossible, that is,
black swans. Bill Bonner. If you had asked a group of investors in August 1929
what was likely to happen on Wall Street, you'd have heard a range of
views. You might even have found a crank or two who predicted a market crash, but
the majority view was nothing like what happened.


# Chapter 20

These are the side margin quotations from Chapter 8.
If you can't measure it, you probably can't manage it.
Things you measure tend to improve, Ed Zecota.
From error to error, one discovers the entire truth, Sigmund Freud.
Although few would admit it, the truth is that the typical trader wants to be right
on every single trade.
He is desperately trying to create certainty where it just doesn't exist.
Mark Douglas.
It is remarkable that a science which began with a consideration of games of chance should
have become the most important object of human knowledge.
The most important questions of life are, for the most part, really only problems of probability.
Pierre Simon Marquis de la Place.
Do not believe in anything simply because you have heard it.
Do not believe in anything simply because it is spoken and rumored by many.
Do not believe in anything simply because it is found written in your religious books.
Do not believe in anything merely on the authority of your teachers and elders.
Do not believe in traditions because they have been handed down from many generations.
But after observation and analysis, when you find that anything agrees with reason and
is conducive to the good and benefit of one and all, then accept it and live up to
it.
Probability theory is the underpinning of the modern world.
Current research in both physical and social sciences cannot be understood without it.
Today's politics, tomorrow's weather report, and next week's satellites depend on it.
I'd say the non-normal distribution is what we see arbitrage.
That is what you make profits from, Richard Dennis.
Everyone's entitled to their own opinion, but they're not entitled to their own facts.
Daniel Patrick Moynihan
I have no special talents.
I am only passionately curious.
Albert Einstein
Standard deviation measures the uncertainty in a random variable, in this case investment
returns.
It measures the degree of variation of returns around the mean, average return.
The higher the volatility of the investment returns, the higher the standard deviation
will be.
National Institute of Standards and Technology
Mathematics and science are two different notions, two different disciplines.
By its nature, good mathematics is quite intuitive.
Experimental science doesn't really work that way.
Intuition is important.
Making guesses is important.
Thinking about the right experiments is important.
But it's a little more broad and a little less deep, so the mathematics we use here
can be sophisticated.
But that's not really the point.
We don't use very, very deep stuff.
One of our statistical approaches can be very sophisticated.
I'm not suggesting it's simple.
I want a guy who knows enough math so that he can use those tools effectively, but has
a curiosity about how things work and enough imagination and tenacity to dope it out.
Jim Simons
Luck is largely responsible for my reputation for genius.
I don't walk into the office in the morning and say, Am I smart today?
I walk in and wonder, Am I lucky today?
Jim Simons
One would not expect to see a home improvement volume with the title, The New Reality of Plumbing.
But the science of investing, at least as it is propagated by financial writers, undergoes
a seeming revolution every couple of thousand points on the Dow.
The risk-reducing formulas behind portfolio theory rely on a number of demanding and ultimately
unfounded premises.
First, they suggest that price changes are statistically independent from one another.
The second assumption is that price changes are distributed in a pattern that conforms
to a standard bell curve.
Do financial data neatly conform to such assumptions?
Of course they never do.
Then wah b. Mandelbrot
Skewness is a measure of symmetry or, more precisely, the lack of symmetry.
A distribution, or data set, is symmetric if it looks the same to the left and right
of the center point.
National Institute of Standards and Technology
Kurtosis is a measure of whether the data are peaked or flat relative to a normal distribution.
That is, data sets with high kurtosis tend to have a distinct peak near the mean, decline
rather rapidly, and have heavy tails.
Data sets with low kurtosis tend to have a flat top near the mean rather than a sharp
peak.
A uniform distribution would be the extreme case.
National Institute of Standards and Technology
For such a long time we have thought that most data must have a normal distribution
and therefore that the mean is meaningful.
Much of the world around us is not normal.
And it is so difficult to see the simplest things as they really are.
We become so used to our assumptions that we can no longer see them or evidence against
them.
Instead of challenging our assumptions, we spend our time studying the details, the
colors of the threads that we tear from the tapestry of the world.
That is why science is hard.
Say goodbye to a nice, steady equilibrium perspective.
Equilibrium equals death.
Things do not rock along smoothly, change in small increments.
Change is catastrophic.
We must learn to adapt because we cannot predict.


# Chapter 21

CHAPTER IX. HOLY GRAILS
Jesse Livermore described Wall Street as a giant whorehouse, where brokers were pimps
and stocks whores, and where customers queued to throw their money away. The Economist.
Tell the truth and then run. Proverb. Al Capone famously said, It's a racket, though
stock market guys are crooked. That's dead on. The crooked abound, or to be kind,
I will call them ignorant. Or, to be nice, I will call them wrong. I often wonder if my
great-great-uncle Frank Mast, Bao Liss-Mustauskas, my grandfather's uncle, passed a little of
that good-fight attitude genetic material along. Assistant State Attorney Mast is captured
in the supplemental PDF, face-to-face with famed crime boss Al Capone at a Chicago courthouse.
The rackets, found on Wall Street, always overflow with holy grails, those predictions,
secret formulas, and divine interpretations that promise otherworldly knowledge and riches.
They are most often delivered in the investment world through a black box, a closed system
where the inputs and outputs are known, but the internal analytical workings are left top-secret,
only for the high priest's consumption. Black box positioning goes far beyond markets.
It is not surprising in a modern, interconnected age, when you take a smart guy, rows of computers,
proprietary formulas, and code only the one smart guy can see, and then add a string
of successful forecasts, boom. You end up with a nerdy, made-for-social-media superstar
who suddenly makes prediction cool for the proletariat.
Nate Silver is that IT guy. Consider, he successfully called the outcomes in 49 of the 50 states
in the 2008 U.S. presidential election. He successfully called the outcomes in 50 of
the 50 states in the 2012 U.S. presidential election. Thus, Silver became the go-to
smart numbers guy overnight. He went from baseball stats expert to political stats expert.
His mathematical model for elections beat political journalists and commentators at their
own game. So goes his money ball for politics narrative. In short order, his followers
on Twitter surpassed one million. His book became a bestseller, and FiveThirtyEight.com
became ubiquitous, even offering investing insights such as, worried about the stock
market, whatever you do, don't sell. Yet for anyone who followed the 2016 presidential
race, Silver's political predictions went bust. Over the course of 2016, Silver posted daily
election odds that jumped around like a cat on fire. Not exactly surprising if your new
guru status forces you to offer forecasts every day of an election cycle for over a year.
He admitted in his laborious mea culpa, how I acted like a pundit and screwed up
on Donald Trump, to not using his statistical models on Donald Trump's candidacy. He instead
used educated guesses, which blew his statistical model made me famous you can now trust I am
not a typical pundit with built-in biases storyline out of the water. Worse yet, the
way Silver outlined his predictions, he could say he was right no matter what happened.
For Silver's followers, his 2016 hedged forecasts, his arguable math-turbation doesn't
matter. Look at Nate's record, Trump was an outlier. There was not enough historical
data. He gets most of them right. Nate's winning percentage is so high. Those weak
retorts illustrate the faulty foundation in Silver's approach. He leaves out the surprises,
the unusual and unexpected. He has no way of predicting or accounting for those. On
Trump's win, Silver said as much, it's the most shocking political development of
my lifetime. But no one can predict outliers, so if someone like Silver pretends he can,
watch out. Spiro Smokridakis, in his famed 1979 paper, Accuracy of Forecasting,
an empirical investigation, showed simple beats complicated and moving averages beat
torturous econometric routines. Would moving averages also have predicted the two elections
that made Silver a household name? Nonetheless, Silver defenders come back to the 49 out of 50
and 50 out of 50 in 2008 and 2012, proof, they say, as they ignore 2016. But in 2008 and 2012,
what percentage of those were hard calls? For example, California is blue no matter what.
So there is always a huge risk in relying on strategy that gets the easy calls right
and punts on the hard ones. These are not terribly new inconsistencies to ponder.
The efficient market theory, the strategy that runs the world's money,
also has no solution for surprises, that is, black swans. Silver illustrates the conundrum
across a different discipline, but with the same pressing problem. In summer 2016,
Nassim Taleb, father of the black swan, launched a detailed criticism of Silver into
the public sphere. At FiveThirtyEight is showing us a textbook case on how to be
totally clueless about probability yet make a business in it. The intellectual cage match?
Nassim Taleb versus Nate Silver. Pick your side carefully, it just got real. Buy and hope.
After the spring 2000 stock market bubble implosion and after the October 2008 crash,
passive indexing or buy and hold as a sound investing strategy both should have been
permanently labeled junk science, yet that did not happen. Investors still fall into the
lemmings line and obey mantras such as buy and hold for the long term,
stay the course and buy the dips. These happy talk market prayers share the same
problematic issue inherent in Nate Silver's weakness, no accounting for surprise.
Jerry Parker proffers the alternate case. Trend following is similar to a democracy.
Sometimes it doesn't look so good, but it's better than anything else out there. It's a worse
investment now, let's say, than it was in the 70s or 80s. But so what? What other choice do
we have? Are we going to buy market breaks? Are we going to rely on buy and hold? Buy and hope,
that's what I call it. Are we going to double up when we lose money? Are we going to do all
these things that everyone else does? Eventually, people will come to understand that trend
following works in other markets, markets that produce trends.
Consider the Nasdaq market crash of 1973 to 1974. The Nasdaq reached its high peak in
December 1972. It then dropped by nearly 60%, hitting rock bottom in September 1974. The
Nasdaq did not break permanently free of the 1973-1974 bear market until April 1980.
Buy and hold did nothing for investors from December 1972 through March 1980. Investors
would have made more money during this period in a 3% savings account. History repeated
itself with the 77% drop in the Nasdaq from 2000 to 2002. Making matters worse, pure buy
and hold strategy during an extended market drop makes recovery back to break even difficult,
if not impossible. Buy and hold investors have been led to slaughter by an industry with
powerful conflicts of interest. They believe armed only with tremendous patience, they
will make a good long-term return. These investors expect to make back most, if not
all, of any loss. They believe the best place for long-term capital is the stock market,
long only, and if they give it 5 or 10 or 20 years, they will rock and roll. Investors
need to understand they can go 5, 10 and 20 years and make no return at all and even
lose money. To compound problems, buy and hold panders
to market revenge. Investors want their money back. They think, I lost my money in XYZ
stock, and I'm going to make my money back in the same stock come hell or high water
no matter what. It's now personal. They can't fathom sunk costs or admit passive holding
forever might have seriously unexamined fissures under the surface. They buy and hold no matter
what happens, regardless of how many times they get kicked in the teeth. It's a version
of Stockholm Syndrome with bad investing strategy as the captor.
Jonathan Honig sees where many fall down. I am a trader because my interest isn't in
owning stocks per se, but in making money. And while I do trade in stocks, among other
investments, I don't have blind faith that stocks will necessarily be higher by the time
I'm ready to retire. If history has demonstrated anything, it's that we can't simply put
our portfolios on autopilot and expect things to turn out for the best. You can't be a
trader when you're right and an investor when you're wrong. That's how you lose. If
you use a system, you automatically have a seatbelt on for protection. That keeps you
from making portfolio buy-sell decisions the next time CNN's Don Lemon postulates that
a missing Malaysian Boeing 777 may have entered a black hole. Warren Buffett. Warren Buffett
is positioned as the single biggest proponent of value investing and buy-and-holding, accurate
or not. Like Sir Galahad, he has achieved his real holy grail, and I am the first to
salute his immense success. However, can you achieve what he has via insurance companies
and arcane tax advantages? No. He is the classic exception to the rule. There is only one
Buffett. Unfortunately, many mistakenly assume Buffett is the simple buy-and-hold investor.
Honey, Warren made all of his money holding coke for forty years. Uh, his sixty-plus billion
dollar net worth is far more complex than that. For example, Buffett was once against
financial derivatives. Things are less lucrative in the stock market. We have more money
than ideas, he said, adding that six percent to seven percent was a fair rate of return
in the current environment. The company has more than thirty-seven billion dollars in
cash to invest. One place the money certainly won't go is derivatives. There's no place
with as much potential for phony numbers as derivatives. Buffett's billionaire vice-chairman,
Charlie Munger, couldn't resist chiming in. To say that derivative accounting is a
sewer is an insult to sewage. Sixteen days later, Buffett changed tune.
Berkshire Hathaway, Inc. announced today that it has sold four hundred million dollars
of a new type of security named Squares, in a private placement to qualified institutional
investors. Despite the lack of precedent, a negative coupon security seemed possible in
the present interest rate environment. I asked Goldman Sachs to create such an instrument,
and they responded promptly with the innovative security being announced today, said Warren
Buffett. If Buffett was forthright at first, what
made him change two weeks later and create an instrument so complicated and secretive,
not even his press release could explain it. Even more confusing is that Buffett contradicted
himself a year later, lambasting with vigor his financial Frankenstein creation.
Derivatives are financial weapons of mass destruction, carrying dangers while now latent
are potentially lethal. We view them as time bombs, both for the parties that deal
in them and the economic system. In 2008, Buffett was again trading derivatives
and helping to promote government bailouts. Still today, in 2017, his firm maintains
massive derivative positions. The Buffett legend of value investing or buy and hold
as his strategy to make billions has permeated the public consciousness with books by the
literal dozens, and when he launches a new derivative strategy against his legend, no
one talks. Long-time fund manager Michael Steinhardt was the exception. Buffett is
the greatest PR person of recent times, and he has managed to achieve a snow job that has
conned virtually everyone in the press to my knowledge, and it is remarkable that he
continues to do it. Warren Buffett is an investing icon and
deserves high praise, but unlike trend following, where there are examples of multiple trend
following winners, there is only one Warren Buffett. It makes you pause. Is he the sole
survivor? A few years back, I sat down with a trend
trader. He has a 30-year plus track record making an average 20 percent a year. The
topic of Warren Buffett came up. While he was very respectful of Buffett, he was bewildered
how some could call his trend following trading lock, but those same people could
see Buffett as skilled. This trader pointed out the thousands of trades he has made. He
noted his trend trading peers also produced thousands of trades over decades. He saw it
more logical to make an argument for Buffett's success much more connected to luck given
the relatively few leveraged trades that helped make him so astronomically wealthy
— Coke, Gillette, American Express, Goldman Sachs, and Wells Fargo. Losers average losers.
There's a famous 1980s picture of Paul Tudor Jones, the great macro trader profiled and
market wizards, relaxing in his office. Tacked up on the wall behind him on a loose leaf sheet
of paper is the simple phrase in black magic marker, losers average losers.
Jones's wisdom was lost on James K. Glassman back during the dot-com bubble. If you
had Enron in your portfolio and didn't sell it for $90 or even at $10, don't feel
embarrassed. As Alfred Harrison, a money manager at Alliance Capital Management Holding LP,
which owned a ton of Enron put it, on the surface said it always seemed to be a fairly good growth
stock. We bought it all the way down. Glassman and Harrison were dead wrong.
What they call dollar-cost averaging is averaging a loser, Enron, all the way down.
Traders should feel sick if they average losers, not embarrassed.
When you have a losing position, it is telling you something is wrong. As unbelievable as it
seems to the novice, the longer a market declines, the more likely it is to continue declining.
Google every white paper you can find post-2010 on time series momentum.
Falling markets are never places to buy cheap, unless you expect to live forever,
and that might not be enough if whatever market flops to zero.
In our zero-sum world, if the trend is down, it is not a buying opportunity,
it is a selling opportunity. A time to go short opportunity. Even worse, as an active
money manager for clients, Glassman admitted to averaging losers as his strategy. To top it off,
he opined. Could the typical small investor have discovered a year ago that Enron was on the
brink of disaster? It's highly unlikely. Still, if you looked for the right thing,
you would have never bought Enron in the first place. Hold on, there was a way to spot Enron's
problems. The price going from $90 to 50 cents was a clear indication the brink of disaster
was right around the corner, hiding in plain sight. Jesse Livermore knew 80 years earlier
how to avoid averaging losers. I have warned against averaging losses. This is a most common
practice. Great numbers of people buy a stock, let us say at 50, and two or three days later,
if they can buy it at 47, they are seized with the urge to average down by buying another hundred
shares, making a price of 48.5 on all. Having bought at 50 and being concerned over a three-point
loss on a hundred shares, what rhyme or reason is there in adding another hundred shares and
having the double worry when the price hits 44. At that point, there would be a $600 loss
on the first hundred shares and a $300 loss on the second shares. If one is to apply
such an unsound principle, he should keep on averaging by buying 200 at 44, then 400 at 41,
800 at 38, 1600 at 35, 3200 at 32, 6400 at 29, and so on. How many speculators could
stand such pressure? So, at the risk of repetition and preaching, let me urge you to avoid averaging
down. Others have tried to average losers as well. Julian Robertson ran one of the biggest
and most profitable hedge funds ever. However, his run ended. On March 30, 2000, CNN excerpted
a letter Julian Robertson sent to Tiger's Investors blaming his fund's problems on
the rush to cash. As you have heard me say on a number of occasions, the key to Tiger's success
over the years has been a steady commitment to buying the best stocks and shorting the worst.
In a rational environment, this strategy functions well. But in an irrational market,
where earnings and price considerations take a backseat to mouse clicks and momentum,
such logic, as we have learned, does not count for much. The result of the demise of value
investing and investor withdrawals has been financial erosion, stressful to us all.
And there is no real indication that a quick end is in sight.
Tiger's spiral downward started fall of 1998 when a catastrophic trade on dollar yen
cost the fund billions. An ex-Tiger employee was blunt. There's a certain amount of hubris when
you take a position so big you have to be right and so big you can't get out when you're wrong.
That was something Julian never would have done when he was younger.
That isn't good risk-return analysis. The problem? Tiger's shaky strategy foundation.
Robertson was open to criticism. Our mandate is to find the 200 best companies in the world and
invest in them, and find the 200 worst companies in the world and go short on them.
If the 200 best don't do better than the 200 worst, you probably should go into another
business. Sifting through information was Robertson's forte. According to one associate,
he can look at a long list of numbers and a financial statement he'd never seen before and say,
that one is wrong. And he's right. Although that talent is impressive, being able to read and
critique a balance sheet doesn't necessarily translate into profits. What do Julian Robertson,
losers' average losers, the dot-com stock crash and October 2008 have in common? Bubbles.
The 2008 crash was no different from the tulip bulb bubble made famous in Holland. In 1720,
when the South Sea bubble was at its height, even Sir Isaac Newton, the greatest genius of
his time, got sucked into the hysteria and he eventually lost 20,000 pounds. Wash, rinse, repeat.
Although bubbles appear as blips in history, the aftermath is long-term disaster, resulting in
severe recessions and government interventions, QE, ZURP, NURP, and the Fed buying common stocks,
that make it worse. Bubble collapses over the past 500 years have always thrown nations into
recessions, lasting a decade or longer. What lesson can be learned from mass delusion?
Human nature continues to be the way it has always been and probably always will be.
Today, sane investors should do more than trust a suit for financial well-being.
Glancing at a pension statement once a quarter, the meat of EMT propaganda sold for 40 years,
won't cut it in the modern world. You can no longer pretend it is retirement money
and the nest egg will go right back up. Take a quick view of the Japanese Nikkei 225 stock index,
see figure 9.1 in the supplemental PDF. The index reached nearly 40,000 in 1989.
Now, over 25 years later, it is still in the range of 20,000. The Japanese do not believe
in buy and hold, and should you? With USA stocks at all-time highs,
interest rates at zero to negative, can you pretend stocks will go up forever
with no 50% decrease ever again? Going back in time, table 9.1 in the supplemental PDF
shows a chart of the hot tech stocks of 1968. Table 9.1, 1968 tech stocks.
Company, Fairchild Camera, 1968 high, 102. 1970 low, 18. Percent drop, negative 82.
Price to earning ratio at high, 443. Teledyne, 1968 high, 72. 1970 low, 13.
Percent drop, negative 82. Price to earning ratio at high, 42.
Control data, 1968 high, 163. 1970 low, 28. Percent drop, negative 83. Price to earning ratio at high,
54. Mohawk data, 1968 high, 111. 1970 low, 18. Percent drop, negative 84.
Price to earning ratio at high, 285. Electronic data, 1968 high, 162. 1970 low,
24. Percent drop, negative 85. Price to earning ratio at high, 352. Optical scanning, 1968 high,
146. 1970 low, 16. Percent drop, negative 89. Price to earning ratio at high, 200.
iTech, 1968 high, 172. 1970 low, 17. Percent drop, negative 90.
Price to earning ratio at high, 71. University Computing, 1968 high, 186. 1970 low, 13.
Percent drop, negative 93. Price to earning ratio at high, 118.
Booms and busts all look the same, boiling down to the terrible twins of greed and fear.
Unfortunately for investors, journalists are too quick to use fear-based copy to push investors
into blindly accepting the new normal as their fate accompli. Now with your portfolio trashed
and social security looking insecure, you may be having nightmares about spending your retirement
haunting the mac and cheese early bird specials or about not being able to retire until six years
after you've died. With the bull market gone, will the impending retirement of the post-World
War II generation be the boomer bust? If you work hard, save and adopt more realistic expectations,
you can still retire rather than die in the harness. Earning maybe 9% on stocks isn't as
good as the 20% that you might have grown used to, but it's not bad. Saying 9% compounded is not
bad compared to 20% compounded mindlessly ignores the pure math. Imagine the last 25 years and two
investments of $1,000 each. The first investment generated 9% for 25 years and the second
investment generated 20% for 25 years. $1,000 compounded at 9% for 25 years equals $8,600.
$1,000 compounded at 20% for 25 years equals $95,000. Here are two examples of not having
a real compounding plan, but rather trusting buy and hope as the only strategy.
What do you do if you find yourself at retirement age without enough to retire on?
You keep working. John Rother, AARP's policy director. I've worked hard all my life and
been a responsible citizen and it's not supposed to be threatened at this point.
Gail Hovey, who works for nonprofit groups in Hawaii. No one wants to see Gail homeless,
yet no one wants society to reward one group's hair-brained mistakes with government bailouts
paid for by a second group that did not make the same errors. Recall the 2008 bailouts and
ponder the next round of bailouts sure to follow the next crash. Life should not be
contorted into fare when it isn't. No political body should legislate outcomes.
It is fine to compound trading gains, but it's not fine for government to compound idiocy.
Even well-paid top professionals running pension assets are always no exit plan buy and holders
when the chaos reveals who is swimming naked. Every major investor in the nation was heavily
invested in WorldCom.com-era scam. They were one of the largest corporations in America,
stated the New York State Comptroller. Their plan was the same idiocy employed by the state
retirement plans of Michigan, Florida, and California that also lost in.com bubble favorite
WorldCom because they all had no exit strategy. The state of Michigan reported an unrealized
loss of about $116 million on WorldCom. The state of Florida reported an unrealized
loss of about $90 million on WorldCom. The California Public Employees Retirement System,
CalPERS, reported an unrealized WorldCom loss of about $565 million.
Referring to $8.4 million in WorldCom stock that dropped in value to only around $492,000,
Robert Leggett of Kentucky Retirement System said,
until you actually sell it, you haven't lost it. Ouch! That is not logical.
Make sure, as an observer of these players, you too don't get caught up in the particular market
or year, as if only the current day can teach a lesson. It's the wrong-headed psyche of these
decision-makers that's worth noting. Learning from losers, after all, is quite a smart strategy.
Ed Secota summed up the competitive playing field,
the best measure of your intention is the result you get. Avoiding stupidity.
CNBC anchor Joe Kernan's first interview with trend following trader David Harding
instantly became a case study for the media zeitgeist. At the time of this interview,
Harding's firm, Winton Capital, was managing $21 billion in assets for clients via trend
following strategies, today over $30 billion. Kernan started the interview reading from a
piece of paper describing Harding as a systematic trend follower who believes scientific research
will succeed in the long run. He wondered out loud if computers were used and asked Harding
to describe his trading strategy. Harding, on remote from London, responded his firm,
goes with the flow. He said he follows trends and makes money going long on rising markets
and short on declining markets. He said there had been enough trends for his firm to make
money nearly every year for the last 15 years. Kernan pounced, wondering whether he could
blame Harding and other trend followers for oil and gold going higher and, for the pendulum
swinging much further than it should on a fundamental basis. Harding thought there
might be a kernel of truth to Kernan's point, but there was only so much time to elaborate.
Kernan, under his breath, with a huge wide smile emerging, interjected,
uh, yeah. Harding reminded Kernan his firm was limited by speculative position limits
set by government and his trading size was tiny by comparison to major investment banks.
Harding went on to further clarify he doesn't trade by a gut feel. He added,
we don't just make it up. He also didn't apologize for his scientific approach to markets,
an approach he defined as rigorous. Kernan replied with a shot across the bow,
bringing up failed hedge fund, long-term capital management, LTCM. He saw it as ironic that LTCM
folded in the same year, 1998, Harding's firm launched. I heard science and I heard you've
never had a down year and it just reminded me of LTCM. Kernan talked sarcastically about
the Nobel prize winners at LTCM, their algorithms, and the fact they never had a down year until
their blowup. Harding quickly clarified his firm did have a down year in 2009 and his
performance success went back over two decades, 23 years to be exact. He noted his first firm,
AHL, which he sold, was now the world's largest managed futures fund. He also addressed LTCM
head on, stating the book When Genius Failed, the story of LTCM blowing up, was required reading at
his firm. Kernan, with condescension, quipped, I bet it is. He then went on to ask Harding if
he could provide some of his best picks. That question makes perfect sense for every fundamental
trader who thinks he can predict the future, but it is a ridiculous question to ask a trend-following
trader. Harding replied he could not forecast markets. I can't give you best picks. He pointed
out his success comes from having a slight edge and proper betting. Kernan, still not
about to acknowledge anything positive about trend-following, smugly asked if Harding
would know when the party was over. Harding was nonplussed, noting that there has been a long
history of successful trend-following going back 40 years. He also compared recent trending markets
to another era, the 1970s. Kernan, with a little journalistic objectivity, shot back that he had
heard those kinds of expressions before. Please let there be another real estate boom because
I spent all the money I made. I heard commodities guys saying that for a while too.
He then wrapped up with standard pleasantries and one last zinger, saying that he hoped Harding
could come back again, with the same moniker, same title. Consider a definition of critical
thinking. Critical thinking is the intellectually disciplined process of actively and skillfully
conceptualizing, applying, analyzing, synthesizing, and or evaluating information gathered from
or generated by observation, experience, reflection, reasoning, or communication as a guide to belief
and action. In its exemplary form, it is based on universal intellectual values that transcend
subject matter divisions, clarity, accuracy, precision, consistency, relevance, sound evidence,
good reasons, depth, breadth, and fairness. With that in mind, 1. Is it believable Joe Kernan,
the anchor of CNBC's longest-running program, had no knowledge or comprehension of trend-following
or other descriptions of it, such as managed futures or CTAs? If he was forced to raise his
right hand under the threat of perjury, do you think he would still have such a limited
understanding of trend-following and managed futures? 2. When Kernan asked about trend
followers purportedly pushing markets further than they should be fundamentally,
did that mean he had a way to determine the correct price level of all markets at all times?
3. When Kernan brought up LTCM in an attempt to compare Harding to its demise,
did he not understand Harding did not believe in efficient markets?
Had he ever looked at a monthly up-and-down track record of Harding or any trend follower?
4. Why ask a trend-following trader for picks? 5. When Kernan asked Harding if he would come
back with the same moniker and title, was he implying he believed Harding would blow up
soon and be back on CNBC under some reformulated firm name, like what the
proprietors of LTCM did after their blow-up? Has he ever asked Warren Buffett that question?
6. When you find yourself feeling manipulated by the press, remember, people are sheep,
TV is the shepherd. Now, I could easily see some painting this interview differently.
Harding set himself up for the LTCM tie-in by framing himself as a computer science shop,
looking at data and being black box. You have to expect Kernan to kick you, that's what he does,
just like you know what you're going to get from Glenn Beck or Stephen Colbert.
Harding says, we are the smartest guys on the planet, trends work, and we look at a lot of
data. A reader who runs a fundamental advisory service wrote me, whether Kernan's questions were
clueless or not is really irrelevant. He did not argue with Harding on any point,
and he gave Harding a good opportunity, within the time available,
to explain how his firm implements trend following. Kernan was an adult in the room. I'm thinking
that's the way serious trend followers ought to consider presenting themselves instead of
sarcasm and, we don't predict, as if that is an obvious answer to any question.
The evidence does not bear those criticisms out. There is a deeper game at play beyond my
questions. Joe Kernan is not devoid of academic intelligence. He holds a bachelor's degree from
the University of Colorado in molecular, cellular, and developmental biology, and a master's degree
from MIT. He worked at several investment banks, including Merrill Lynch. I am no Harding
apologist, but I have spent time with him. That research time, coupled with his public
career and track record, make him one of the most learned trend-trading voices of the past 20
years. Kernan had a pre-formulated agenda. His questioning was a transparent attempt to
marginalize Harding and, by extension, trend following. Imagine if the interview started like
this. We at CNBC believe in efficient markets and the use of fundamental analysis. Our business
model also requires viewers to watch 24-7. Today, we have a guest on who has made billions
with trend following trading, which does not require fundamental analysis or CNBC and makes a
mockery of EMT. Would you like to know how to make money without ever watching our channel again?
Welcome, David Harding. You can bet no one at CNBC ever pulled any David Harding SEC filings.
I did. Here is one. Winton's investment technique consists of trading a portfolio of over
100 contracts on major commodity exchanges and forward markets worldwide, employing a totally
computerized, technical, trend following trading system developed by its principles. This system
tracks the daily price movements from these markets around the world and carries out certain
computations to determine each day how long or short the portfolio should be to maximize profit
within a certain range of risk. If rising prices are anticipated, a long position will
be established, a short position will be established if prices are expected to fall.
The trading methods applied by Winton are proprietary, complex, and confidential.
Winton plans to continue the testing and reworking of its trading methodology and,
therefore, retains the right to revise any methods or strategy, including the technical
trading factors used, the commodity interests traded, and or the money management principles
applied. Technical analysis refers to analysis based on data intrinsic to a market, such as
price and volume. This is to be contrasted with fundamental analysis, which relies on
factors external to a market, such as supply and demand. The diversified program uses no
fundamental factors. A trend following system is one that attempts to take advantage of the
observable tendency of the markets to trend and to trend to make exaggerated movements in both
upward and downward directions as a result of such trends. These exaggerated movements
are largely explained as a result of the influence of behavioral biases amongst market participants.
A trend following system does not anticipate a trend. In fact, trend following systems are
frequently unprofitable for long periods of time in particular markets or market groups,
and occasionally they are unprofitable for spells of more than a year, even in large portfolios.
However, in the experience of the principles, over a span of several years,
such an approach has proven to be consistently profitable.
The Winton trading system has been developed by relating the probability of the size and
direction of future price movements with certain oscillators derived from past price movements,
which characterize the degree of trending of each market at any time.
While this is, to some degree, true of all trend following systems,
the unique edge possessed by the Winton system lies in the quality of the analysis underlying
this relationship. This enables the system to suffer smaller losses during the inevitable
whipsaw periods of market behavior and thus take better advantage of the significant
trends when they occur by focusing more resources on them.
The system was developed by research on price data of a variety of futures contracts between
1981 and 1991, known as the in-sample data, and subsequently tested on the data from 1991 to 1997
in order to assess its potential. It has subsequently been updated several times
to incorporate more recent market data. This procedure seeks to avoid the risk of
over-optimizing, which occurs when a system is allowed to fit itself to the historic data.
Harding and Winton are crystal clear that their world revolves around a non-discretionary system.
Trade selection is not subject to intervention by Winton's principles
and therefore is not subject to the influence of individual judgment.
As a mechanical trading system, the Winton model embodies all the expert knowledge required to
analyze market data and direct trades, thus eliminating the risk of basing a trading program
on one indispensable person. Equally as important is the fact that mechanical systems can be tested
in simulation for long periods of time, and the model's empirical characteristics can be measured.
The system's output is rigorously adhered to in trading the portfolio and intentionally no
importance is given to any external or fundamental factors. Whilst it may be seen as unwise to
ignore information of obvious value, such as that pertaining to political or economic developments,
the disadvantage of this approach is far outweighed by the advantage of the discipline
that rigorous adherence to such a system instills. Significant profits are often made
by the Winton system by holding on to positions for much longer than conventional wisdom would
dictate. An individual taking trading decisions and paying attention to day-to-day events
could easily be deflected from the chance of fully capitalizing on such trends
when not adhering to such a system. CNBC once invited me to their offices.
They paid Maisel a train travel from Washington, D.C., to New Jersey,
so it seemed like a no-brainer opportunity to go behind the scenes of the evil empire.
I had no specific knowledge of what they wanted, but the meeting was with producer
Susan Krakauer, who had invented Jim Cramer's show. Once there, it was clear they were
looking for new content. The meeting was in a small, windowless office with Krakauer and
her two female lieutenants. A Jim Cramer poster hung behind her. It was exactly like when Jerry
and George went to meet with NBC on Seinfeld. Krakauer sat in front, by a large desk,
and her two lieutenants flanked on either side. It was triangulation. They peppered me with small
talk questions, yet seemed to have no clue about my writings, research, or thinking.
They had not read my books. They only had a headshot I had not seen before,
something you might imagine an actor brings to a Hollywood casting call.
She asked me to hypothetically program ten hours for CNBC airtime. The idea for new
programming was blunt. Trend following, not more stories. My inability to play the game
did not help, and it was easy to see Kander was taken as an insult. The conversation bounced
around for thirty minutes, and—surprise, surprise—there was no further dialogue.
Walking through CNBC's studios that day reminded me of The Truman Show, a constructed reality,
a staged, scripted TV show. Except, instead of it being one person—Jim
Carey's character—who does not know reality, CNBC's fake plays to a worldwide audience daily,
week after week, and year after year. Analysts go on CNBC daily with unverifiable opinions,
and to this day I know many viewers will think, he sounds bright, he works for J.P. Morgan,
and he's using a lot of financial jargon I don't understand, so he must know something I don't.
He doesn't know what will happen tomorrow. The fact so many commentators said you should buy so
many stocks in the middle of whatever bubble, and were entirely wrong, is proof positive
the Wall Street opinion machine is not the answer, nor will they ever have the answer.
Even though there is never sound rationale for listening, of course many do, and they become
angry when advice proves disastrous. At one point, one discredited analyst became a whipping
boy for investors refusing to accept responsibility. Every time my broker mentions him I get nauseous.
For the past few years, every time I'd call them they'd say, he likes name, or he really likes
name. As a result I now own hundreds of shares of these duds. So now when it comes to investment
research, we need to think twice about the veracity of top-rated vice and stock picks from
someone earning twenty million dollars a year. He should have warned that his
epical bubble was doomed to burst. After all, he was the industry's greatest seer.
However unfair it is to blame just him, here's a situation when one person's
contribution to wholesale disaster is impossible to overlook. Telecommunication stocks were
explosive, new companies went public, old companies saw spectacular growth, and he never
once warned us that this was all a mirage. I am not defending any analyst, but if investors
have their life savings tied up in market predictions, they are in trouble no matter
what. If one stock tanks, leaving a price trend evidence trail, or an entire sector implodes,
investors can't whine. No one forced anyone to listen to anyone. It is a choice. Anyone who held
Fannie, Freddie, AIG, Bear Stearns, or Lehman Brothers all the way down over the course of 2008,
or most recently anyone who held Deutsche Bank or Valiant Pharmaceuticals all the way down,
they have no one to blame except the person staring back in the mirror. Valiant, for example,
dropped 95% since its August 2015 highs. Many of the world's most famous investors,
that is Bill Ackman, Pershing Square, ignored that drop for an assortment of reasons to hang on.
Yet in a blame everyone else society, certain populations will always refuse responsibility
for their decisions. Although they might have lost more than half their portfolio in the
last 30 years, they still eagerly accept invitations like this beauty from a brokerage
firm that technically imploded in 2008. Pick a name, cordially invites you to an educational
workshop, topics discussed, stock market forecast for, fill in the blank whatever year.
When will the recession end? What do I do now? What are the factors of a good stock market?
How did this bear market compare to others? This firm has produced useless forecasts for decades
and still does. But it went under in 2008, only to be rescued by a government-led buyout.
Now, almost a decade later, clients have little memory of the then artificial resuscitation needed
to leave their life savings in the hands of all the wrong people. And of course, there is always
more fun, games, and chaos on the way. No one knows the exact timing of the next pinprick,
but you can bet another black swan is already gearing up for a Pearl Harbor sneak attack.
On the other hand, if you are glued to every word from the talking heads for their supposed
extra-special ability to forecast the trend change, you are in big trouble.
The way we human beings operate helps to explain why speculative bubbles don't even need
the internet or social media in order to thrive. Looking at the chart of any asset price
is enough for investors to reach similar and hasty conclusions without phones, emails, and such.
In short, the fear of missing out is an indirect social contagion.
You think, can't everyone improve and get better? Some can, sure, but not all. No way.
Trend follower Jean-Philippe Bouchot throws cold water on lizard brain decision-making
improvements for the masses. Human brains have most probably changed very little for the last
two thousand years. This means that the neurological mechanisms responsible for the
propensity to invest in bubbles are likely to influence the behavior of human investors
for as long as they will be allowed to trade. Summary food for thought. Things happen.
Jerry Parker. I didn't see it coming. No one did. Some feel forced to do something
rather than sit there. Stop searching for value. Even if you locate value,
that alone does not ensure your ability to buy, sell, or bet right. Stock tips only indicate the
buy side of the equation. They always leave out the sell side.
Charlie Wright. I have sat through hundreds of hours of seminars in which the presenter made it
seem as if he or she had some secret method of dividing where the markets were going.
Either they were deluded or they were putting us on.
Mark Twain. If you tell the truth, you don't have to remember anything.
Ryan Fantana and Anchorman. They've done studies, you know. 60% of the time, it works every time.


# Chapter 22

These are the sidebar quotations for Chapter 9.
What is dangerous is for Americans not to be in the stock market.
We're going to reach the point where stocks are correctly priced and we think that's 36,000.
It's not just a bubble, far from it.
The stock market is undervalued.
James Glassman, Dow 36,000.
Another psychological aspect that drives me to use timing techniques on my portfolio is
understanding myself well enough to know that I could never sit in a buy and hold strategy
for two years during my 1973 and 1974, watch my portfolio go down 48% and do nothing, hoping
it would come back someday.
Tom Basso.
Whenever we see evidence that our rules are even remotely correct, our sense of security
is boosted.
When we are faced with evidence contrary to our rules, we quickly rationalize it away.
With the title alone, Dow 36,000 Causing Hysterics, placing this on your coffee table will elicit
your guests to share their best.com horror story.
How they invested their $100,000 second mortgage in Cisco Systems at $80 after reading about
it, waiting for it to become $500, as predicted in this very book, only to see it dive
to $17.
Just the thought of this book gives me the chuckles.
Amazon Review of Dow 36,000.
History is not a good guide to the future, Jerry Parker.
Only when the tide goes out do you discover who's been swimming naked, Warren Buffett.
From error, loss, to error, loss, one discovers the entire truth, trend, Sigmund Freud.
I bought Snap even when I was pretty positive I would not make a profit in the short run,
but just because I'm a fan of the product.
Chris Rowe, 25-year-old trading for one month, New York Post, March 13, 2017.
Snap is tapping into the pride of ownership for millennials, which we don't see often
in the stock market.
Dan Shatt, Stockpile, New York Post, March 13, 2017.
You will run out of money before a guru runs out of indicators, Neil T. Weintraub.
There is little point in exploring the Elliott Wave theory because it is not a theory
at all, but rather the banal observation that a price chart comprises a series of peaks
and troughs.
Depending on the timescale you use, there can be as many peaks and troughs as you care
to imagine.
Warren Buffett is not warning investors about potential risk when he recommends stock investing.
I am concerned that people will just blindly follow that advice, not realizing the risk
until it is too late, and then they sell at the bottom.
Julian Rubenstein, Value Walk, March 5, 2017.
Sun Microsystems probably has the best near-term outlook of any company I know.
James Cramer, September 7, 2000.
Imagine you were at a car auction hoping to buy a beautiful red 66 Corvette.
Imagine the car that is being auctioned before the Corvette as a 1955 Mercedes Gold Wing
Coupe that sells for $750,000.
The Corvette is up next and the Blue Book price is $35,000.
What would you bid?
Now imagine the car before yours was a kit car replica of the Gold Wing Mercedes that
sold for $75,000.
What would you pay now?
Research has shown that incidental price data can affect what you are willing to pay.
We have a tendency to pay more if the preceding price is considerably higher.
John C. Sunt.
When people say the market is overvalued and there's a bubble, whatever that means, we're
talking about just a handful of stocks.
Most of these stocks are reasonably priced.
There's no reason for them to correct violently any time in the year 2000.
Larry Wachtel, Prudential Securities, December 23, 1999.
Jan the bottom line is, before the end of the year 2000, the Nasdaq and Dow will
be at new record highs.
Myron Kandel, Anger, CNN, FN, April 4, 2000.
If you want a guarantee, buy a toaster.
Clint Eastwood.
I am of the belief that the individual out there is actually not throwing money at things
that they do not understand and is actually using the news and using the information
out there to make smart investment decisions.
Maria Bartiromo, CNBC, March 2001.
You have to say, what if?
What if the stocks rally?
What if they don't?
Like a catcher, you have to wear a helmet.
Jonathan Honig.
Billionaire hedge fund manager, Bill Ackman, sold his 27.2 million shares in
Valiant Pharmaceuticals at around $11 each.
Ackman's Pershing Square Capital Management purchased Valiant at an average
cost of $196 a share in 2015.
CNBC, March 13, 2017.
What makes the Dow at $10,000, particularly noteworthy for us, is that it
means that the index has to rise a mere 26,000 more points to vindicate the
prophecy of those two jokers who achieved 15 seconds of fame when we were
in a full bubble by predicting it would hit 36,000.
We kind of missed them.
They were always good for comic relief.
Another 500 points and we've a hunch they'll be back peddling the same
old moonshine.
On Abelson, Barron's, December 15, 2003.
There is no greater source of conflict among researchers and practitioners
and capital market theory than the validity of trend following.
The vast majority of academic research condemns it as theoretically
bankrupt and of no practical value.
It is certainly understandable why many researchers would oppose trend following.
The validity of trend following calls into question decades of careful
theoretical modeling claiming the markets are efficient and investors are
collectively, if not individually, rational.
Fundamental analysis creates what I call a reality gap between what should
be and what is.
The reality gap makes it extremely difficult to make anything but very
long-term predictions that can be difficult to exploit, even if they
are correct, Mark Douglas.
Once an opponent throws down hypocrisy, inconsistency, cognitive dissonance,
confirmation bias, or belief in the state as savior or daddy, the
hammer comes down.
We should all have that hammer.
Michael Covell.
Whoever wishes to foresee the future must consult the past, for human
events ever resemble those of preceding times.
This arises from the fact that they are produced by men who have been,
and ever will be, animated by the same passions.
The result is that the same problems always exist in every era.
Niccolo Machiavelli.
One of the things that's striking about talking to people who are
politically working in D.C. is, it's so hard to tell what any of them
actually do.
It's a sort of place where people measure input, not output.
You have a fifteen-minute monologue describing a fifteen-page resume
starting in seventh grade.
Peter Thiel.
Anyone who doesn't take truth seriously in small matters cannot be
trusted in large ones either.
Albert Einstein.
Happiness is not something you postpone for the future.
It is something you design for the present.
Jim Rohn.
What we have been seeing worldwide, from India to the U.K., to the U.S., is
the rebellion against the inner circle of no-skin-in-the-game policy-making
clerks and journalist insiders, that class of paternalistic semi-intellectual
experts with some Ivy League, Oxford, Cambridge, or similar label-driven
education, who are telling the rest of us, one, what to do, two, what
to eat, three, how to speak, four, how to think, and five, who to
vote for.
Nassim Taleb.
The biggest cause of trouble in the world today is that the stupid
people are so sure about things, and the intelligent folks are so
full of doubts.
Bertrand Russell.
We are what we repeatedly do.
Excellence then is not an act, but a habit.
Aristotle.
No human investigation can be called real science if it cannot be
demonstrated mathematically.
Leonardo da Vinci.
Forecasts are financial candy.
Analysts give people who hate the feeling of uncertainty something
emotionally soothing.
Student of Edsakotas.
Never let the fear of striking out get in your way.
Babe Ruth.
Assets, once in motion, tend to stay in motion without changing
direction, and that turns the old saw, buy low, sell high, on its
ear.
Enron stock was rated as can't miss until it became clear that
the company was in desperate trouble, at which point analysts lowered
the rating to sure thing.
Only when Enron went completely under did a few bold analysts demote
its stock to the lowest possible Wall Street analyst rating.
Hot buy, Dave Berry.


# Chapter 23

CHAPTER X. TRADING SYSTEMS
If you don't risk anything, you risk even more. Erika Jeong.
No matter what kind of math you use, you wind up measuring volatility with your gut.
—Ed Seacota. To manage human fallibilities, trend-following has a process to counteract
behavioral risk. Psychologist Daniel Crosby lays bare in his
Laws of Wealth, where that success foundation starts. Consistency, clarity, courageousness,
conviction. Building on those four C's, trend-following
reduces to rules that guide daily decision-making. These rules comprise what are commonly called
trading systems. There is no limit to the number of different
types of trading systems. But most trend-following systems are similar as they seek to capture
trends in big liquid markets. Unlike so many holy grails, the never-ending
fundamental predictions of this or that — trading systems are quantified. Dunn Capital, for example,
has said their trading system has a programmed risk of a 1% probability of suffering a monthly
loss of 20% or more. That's what I mean by quantifying. That's
what serious people do. Risk, reward, and uncertainty.
Human-following is a precarious balance between risk and reward. If you want the big rewards,
take big risks. If you want average rewards and an average life, take average risks. Charles
Sanford's commencement address nails it. From an early age, we are all conditioned
by our families, our schools, and virtually every other shaping force in our society to
avoid risk. To take risks is inadvisable. To play it safe is the counsel we are accustomed
both to receiving and to passing on. In the conventional wisdom, risk is asymmetrical.
It has only one side, the bad side. In my experience, and all I presume to offer you
today is observations drawn on my own experience, which is hardly the wisdom of the ages, in
my experience this conventional view of risk is short-sighted and often simply mistaken.
My first observation is that successful people understand that risk, properly conceived,
is often highly productive rather than something to avoid. They appreciate that risk is an advantage
to be used rather than a pitfall to be skirted. Such people understand that taking calculated
risks is quite different from being rash. This view of risk is not only unorthodox,
it is paradoxical. The first of several paradoxes which I am going to present to you today.
This one might be encapsulated as follows. Playing it safe is dangerous. Far more often
than you would realize, the real risk in life turns out to be the refusal to take a risk.
One of Major League Baseball's best pitchers, all of 24 years of age, died in a 2016 boating
accident. Jose Fernandez was almost guaranteed to make hundreds of millions of dollars,
gone in an instant, perhaps due to a very bad risk choice. There is no getting away
from that reality. There will be failure. Therefore, get over yourself and accept that life is a big
league game of chance. And if life is a game of chance, assessing odds in the face of risk
is goal number one. Money under a mattress is no good. The house you purchase could burn
down or the real estate market might tank. Investing only in your startup is zero diversification.
If your corporate job fails, you lose your employment and nest egg. By index mutual funds,
pray that buy and hold will always work for you, that's dicey. There is no way to know what will
happen next. To proceed in the face of risk, begin by accepting markets do not reward stupidity
or ignorance in the long run. They reward brains, guts, and determination to find opportunity
where others have overlooked and to press on where others fall short. Every business
opportunity is ultimately involved in assessing risk. Putting capital to work in the hopes
of making it grow is the goal. The right decisions lead to success and the wrong ones
lead to bankruptcy, Bear Stearns, Lehman Brothers, AIG, Indy Mac, and so on. The key issues
in a solid business plan. What is the market opportunity and the market niche? What is
the solution to the market need? How big is the opportunity? How do you make money? How
do you reach the market and sell? What is the competition? How are you better? How will
you execute and manage the business? What are the risks? Why will you succeed? Those
questions must be answered by everyone regardless of venture or discipline. It is paramount
to answer to assess the risk of a business venture, a relationship, and it is just as
important to answer honestly if you are going to trade. Wise minds know the amount of risk
taken in life is in direct proportion to how much you want to achieve. If you want to
live boldly, you take bold moves. If your goals are meager, they can be reached easily
with less risk of failure, but with greater risk of dissatisfaction. One of the saddest
figures burns with desire to live big, but to avoid risk embraces fear and lives lost.
He is worse off than the man who tries and fails, or the man who never had desire. Yet
there is hope. If you study risk, you will find there are two kinds—blind risk and
calculated risk. The first one, blind risk, is suspect. Blind risk is the calling card
of laziness, the irrational hope, something for nothing, the cold twist of fate. Blind
risk is the pointless gamble, the emotional decision, and the sucker play. The man who
embraces blind risk demonstrates all the wisdom and intelligence of a drunk. However, calculated
risk builds fortunes, nations, and empires. Calculated risk and bold vision go hand
in hand. To use your mind, to see the possibilities, to work things out logically and then move
forward in strength and confidence is what places humans above animals. Calculated risk
lies at the heart of every great achievement and achiever since the dawn of time. Yet,
when it comes to trading, most focus only on how to enter the market. They say, I've
got a way to beat the markets because this trading system I have is right eighty percent
of the time. It's only wrong twenty percent of the time. They need to take a step back.
Okay, what does eighty percent right mean? If eighty percent you don't win much,
but twenty percent of the time you lose a lot, losses can far outweigh gains even though
you're right eighty percent of the time. The magnitude of wins and losses is the game.
Lotteries, for example, reach jackpots of hundreds of millions of dollars or more all the
time. And as the jackpot gets bigger, more buy tickets and the buying feeding frenzy.
But as they buy more, the odds of winning do not increase. The ticket buyers still have
a better chance of being struck by lightning. For example, the odds of winning the California
Super Lotto jackpot are one in eighteen million. If one purchases fifty Lotto tickets each week,
he will win the jackpot about once every five thousand years. If a car gets twenty-five
miles per gallon and a gallon of gas is bought for every Lotto ticket bought, there will
be enough gas for about seven hundred fifty round trips to the moon before the jackpot
is won. If you know the odds are against you, don't play.
Likewise, if your trading system says you have a one in thirty thousand chance of winning
or roughly the same chance as being struck by lightning, you don't bet everything. You
must have a mathematical expectation, an edge, or you won't win in the long run. For example,
consider a coin flipping game. Imagine an unbiased coin toss game. Suppose
also you bet that the next flip will be heads and the payoff will be even money
when you win. You receive a dollar profit in addition to the return of the wager.
The mathematical expectation is .5 x 1 plus .5 x negative 1 equals zero. The mathematical
expectation of any bet in any game is computed by multiplying each possible gain or loss
by the probability of gain or loss. Then you add the two numbers. In this example,
you can expect to gain nothing from playing this game. This is known as fair game, one
in which a player has no advantage or disadvantage. Now, suppose the payoff was changed to three
to two, a gain of a dollar fifty in addition to a dollar bet. The expectation would change
to .5 x 1.5 plus .5 x negative 1 equals positive .25. Playing this game one hundred
times would give a positive expectation of .25. This is the exact type of edge cultivated
and honed inside trend following strategy. You might ask, if everyone knows about expectation,
how can I ever find my edge for success in the face of competition? Good question. Consider a scene
from the movie A Beautiful Mind, the film biography of mathematician John Nash. Nash and
some of his mathematician buddies are in a bar when a sexy blonde and four brunettes walk in. After
they admire the new arrivals, Nash and his friends decide to compete for the blonde. However,
Nash has reservations, correctly observing if everyone goes for the same woman, they will
just end up blocking each other out. Worse, they will offend the rest of the women not chosen.
The only way for everyone to succeed is to ignore the blonde and hit on the brunettes.
This scene dramatizes the Nash equilibrium, his most important contribution to game theory.
Nash proved in any competitive situation—war, chess, even picking up a date at a bar—if the
participants are rational and they know that opponents are rational, there is only one
optimal strategy. That theory won Nash a Nobel Prize in economics and transformed the way we
think about competition in both games and the real world. Building off Nash's work,
Ed Sakota lays out a basic risk definition. Risk is the possibility of loss. That is,
if you own a stock and there is a possibility of a price decline, you are at risk. The stock
is not the risk, nor has lost the risk. The possibility of loss is risk. As long as you
own the stock, you are at risk. The only way to control risk is to exit. In the matter
of trading stocks for profit, risk is unavoidable and the best you can do is to manage the risk.
Risk management is to direct and control the possibility of your loss. The activities of
a risk manager are to measure risk and to increase and decrease risk by buying and selling.
In general, good risk management combines several elements. One, clarifying trading
and risk management systems until they can translate to computer code. Two, include
diversification and instrument selection in the back testing process. Three, back testing
and stress testing to determine trading parameter sensitivity and optimal values. Four, clear
agreement among all parties regarding volatility and return expectations. Five, maintenance of
supportive relationships between investors and managers. Six, above all, stick to the system.
Seven, see number six above. Five questions. Answer the following five questions and you
will have the core components of a trend following trading system and be on your
way to having your edge. One, how does the system know what to buy or sell? Two,
how does the system know how much to buy or sell? Three, how does the system buy or
sell short? Four, how does the system get out of a losing position? Five, how does the
system get out of a winning position? These five questions are seminal to trend
following but no less important is attitude. Don't forget, what do you want? Why are you
trading? What are your strengths and weaknesses? Do you have any emotional issues? How disciplined
are you? Are you easily convinced? How confident are you in yourself? How confident are you in
your system? How much risk can you handle? When I discussed trading with Ed Zaccotta and
Charles Faulkner, they both said the first step any person should take before trading
is to complete a personal inventory. What is my nature and how well am I suited to trading?
How much money do I want to make? What level of effort am I willing to make to reach my goals?
What, if any, is my investing slash trading experience? What resources can I bring to bear?
What are my strengths and weaknesses? Answering these questions is mandatory for when you are
in the middle of the zero-sum game and adrenaline and sweat are flowing heavy.
You can't afford to blink when chaos hits. What do you buy or sell? Will you trade stocks,
currencies, futures, commodities? What markets will you choose? While some people might focus
on limited, market-specific portfolios, such as currencies or bonds, others pursue a more
widely diversified portfolio of markets. For example, the AHL Diversified Program,
the largest trend-following fund in the world, now run by Man Financial, trades a diversified
portfolio of over 100 core markets on 36 exchanges. They trade stock indices, bonds,
currencies, short-term interest rates, and commodities. For example, energies, metals,
and agriculturals. Table 10.1, AHL Portfolio. Currencies, 24.3%. Bonds, 19.8%. Energies,
19.2%. Stocks, 15.1%. Interest rates, 8.5%. Metals, 8.2%. Agricultureals, 4.9%.
AHL does not have fundamental expertise. No trend-following trader keeps fundamental experts
on staff. They do not have an in-depth understanding of the companies that comprise whatever stock
index. Their expertise is to take these different markets and make them the same
through price analysis. When you look at trend-following performance, losses are offset by
winners. No one ever knows which market will be the big trend that pays for the losses,
hence the need for diversification. AHL is even more precise about diversification.
The cornerstone of the AHL investment philosophy is that financial markets experience persistent
anomalies or inefficiencies in the form of price trends. Trends are a manifestation of
serial correlation in financial markets, the phenomenon whereby past price movements inform
about future price behavior. Serial correlation can be explained by factors as obvious as crowd
behavior, as well as more subtle factors, such as varying levels of information among different
market participants. Although they vary in their intensity, duration, and frequency,
price trends are universally recurrent across all sectors and markets.
Trends are an attractive focus for active trading styles applied across a diverse range
of global markets. You can see AHL's words perform in practice by how another trend-following
trader described diversification. Portfolio diversification is often said to lose its
importance after you have 7 to 10 different instruments in your portfolio. We found this
simply not to be the case. Pre-June 2007, we traded with 18 major markets in the program,
and we were in 7 to 8 of them most of the time. In short, our exposure was 7 to 8 markets at any
one time, while signals in 18 were possible. After evaluating the program, we discovered that
most of our losses at the time were coming from one or two sectors that hit their maximum
loss at roughly the same time. A breakout in the 10-year notes was most likely followed by
a breakout in the 5-year notes. Trading several highly correlated markets had led to exaggerated
losses because these markets triggered a larger drawdown as they were stopped out together.
He increased his portfolio to over 40 markets with the goal of being in 15-plus markets
most of the time, and he still left his core trading system, entry and exits, the same.
The turnaround in results was dramatic, all from changing the portfolio diversification.
Paul Mulvaney, for example, made over 40% in October 2008 alone. His performance was generated
from these markets. Currency 8.91%, interest rates 2.78%, stocks 14.59%, metals 9.83%, energy
3.43%, crops 7.84%, livestock 4.51%. Yes, that is one great outlier month. All months and sectors
will not always be positive, clearly. But Mulvaney's performance during one of the
worst months ever is a wake-up call to trend-following possibilities. After all,
author and film star Ben Stein famously said, if you made money in October 2008,
you were doing something wrong. Now, fast-forward eight years. On June 23, 2016,
51.9% of the United Kingdom voted to exit the European Union.
Most prognosticators were surprised if not shocked. Mulvaney's performance was 17% on June 24.
His one-day Brexit performance, his greatest one-day return in the history of his firm,
is a fantastic illustration of being on the right side of surprise. Longtime trend-following
trader Robert Rotella adds, qualitative examination of price movements suggests
that markets were trending in the direction of the Brexit exit in the prior months.
This is supported by systematic analysis over the same period.
There is never one perfect portfolio composition that will capture the next trend.
Many trade different portfolios for untold different reasons. Generally speaking,
trend-followers trade the same markets. However, although larger trend-following
funds might avoid smaller markets, such as pork bellies or orange juice,
other trend-following traders might trade currency or bond-only portfolios.
Salem Abraham, for example, once made a killing off cattle. Whatever markets chosen to trade
remain open to opportunity when it arrives. Author Tom Friedman makes the strong argument
for sound strategy in a complex world. If you can't see the world, and you can't see the
interactions that are shaping the world, you cannot strategize about the world.
And if you are going to deal with a system as complex and brutal as globalization and
prosper within it, you need a strategy for how to choose prosperity for your country or company.
Friedman knows all too well the real power brokers in today's frighteningly
interconnected world are traders, not politicians. How much do you buy or sell?
The question many avoid at all costs is the question of money management,
also called risk management, position sizing, or bet sizing. It is a critical component to trend-following
success. As Gibbons Burke observes, Money management is like sex. Everyone does it,
one way or another, but not many like to talk about it, and some do it better than others.
When any trader makes a decision to buy or sell short, they must also decide at that time how
many shares or contracts to buy or sell. The order form on every brokerage page has a blank
spot where the size of the order is specified. The essence of risk management is making a
logical decision about how much to buy or sell when you fill in this blank. This decision
determines the risk of the trade. Accept too much risk and you increase the odds that you will
go bust. Take too little risk and you will not be rewarded in sufficient quantity to beat
the transaction costs and the overhead of your efforts. Good money management practice is about
finding the sweet spot between these undesirable extremes. I've only got a certain amount of
money. How much do I trade? If you have a hundred thousand dollars and you want to trade
Microsoft, well, how much of your hundred thousand dollars will you trade on Microsoft on your first
trade? Will you trade all one hundred thousand dollars? What if you're wrong? What if you're
wrong in a big way and you lose your entire one hundred thousand dollars on one bet?
Trend following, by design, makes small bet sizes initially.
So, if you start at one hundred thousand dollars and you're going to risk two percent,
that equals two thousand dollars. You might say to yourself, I've got a hundred thousand dollars.
Why am I only risking two thousand dollars? What's the deal? I've got a hundred thousand dollars.
Two thousand dollars is nothing. That's not the point. You can't predict where the trend will go.
You don't know up or down. One trader's view on the initial risk decision.
There are traders who are unwilling to risk more than one percent, but I would find it surprising
to hear of any trader who risks more than five percent of assets per trade. Bear in mind,
risking too little doesn't give the market the opportunity to allow your profitable trade to occur.
Think about money management as getting physically fit. Let's say you're a male athlete and you want
peak performance. You weigh a hundred and eighty five pounds, eighty four kilograms, and you're
six foot one, one hundred eighty five centimeters. Well, guess what? You can't lift weights six
times a day for twelve hours a day for thirty straight days without hurting yourself during
those thirty days. There's an optimum amount of lifting you can do in a day that gets you ahead
without setting you back. You want to be at that optimal point,
just as you want to get to an optimal point with money management.
Etsukote describes that optimal point with the concept of heat. Placing a trade with a predetermined
stop loss point can be compared to placing a bet. The more money risked, the larger the bet.
Conservative betting produces conservative performance, while bold betting leads to spectacular
ruin. A bold trader placing large bets feels pressure or heat from the volatility of the
portfolio. A hot portfolio keeps more at risk than does a cold one. Portfolio heat
seems to be associated with personality preference. Bold traders prefer and are able to take more heat,
while more conservative traders generally avoid the circumstances they give rise to heat.
In portfolio management, we call the distributed bet size the heat of the portfolio. A diversified
portfolio risking two percent on each of five instruments has a total heat of ten percent,
as does a portfolio risking five percent on each of two instruments.
A student of Etsukote adds, there has to be some governor so I don't end up with a whole lot of
risk. The size of the bet is small, around two percent. Etsukote calls his risk-adjusted equity
core equity and the risk tolerance percentage heat. Heat can be turned up or down to suit the
trader's pain tolerance. As the heat gets higher, so do the gains, but only up to a point.
Past that point, more heat starts to reduce the gain. Traders must be able to select a heat level
where they are comfortable. Do you trade the same with a hundred thousand dollars as you would
two hundred thousand dollars? What if your one hundred thousand dollars goes to seventy-five
thousand dollars? Tom Basso knows many traders usually begin trading small, say, with one
contract, and as they get more confident they might increase to ten contracts. Eventually,
they attain a comfort level of one hundred or one thousand contracts where they may stay.
Basso counsels against this. He stresses the goal is to keep things on constant leverage.
His method of calculating the number of contracts to trade keeps him trading the same way
even as equity increases or decreases. One of the reasons traders don't trade
proportionally as capital increases is fear. Although it might feel comfortable when the
math dictates you trade a certain number of shares or contracts at fifty thousand dollars,
when the math dictates trade a certain amount at five hundred thousand dollars,
you might become risk averse. So instead of trading the optimal amount at whatever
capital you have, some trade less. This can be avoided by creating an abstract money world.
Don't think about what money can buy. Look at numbers like when playing monopoly or risk.
Dunn Capital speaks to the money as a way to keep score perspective.
Part of Dunn's approach is adjusting trading positions to the amount of equity under
management. He says if his portfolio suffers a major drawdown, he adjusts positions to the
new equity level. Unfortunately, he says, not enough traders follow this rather simple strategy.
If you start with a hundred thousand dollars and you lose twenty five thousand dollars,
you obviously now have seventy five thousand dollars. You must make your trading decisions off
seventy five thousand dollars, not one hundred thousand dollars. You don't have one hundred
thousand dollars anymore. However, Paul Mulvaney felt I was missing a critical aspect in money
management. Trend following is implicitly about dynamic rebalancing, which is why successful
traders appear fearless. Many hedge fund methodologies make risk management a separate
endeavor. In trend following, it is part of the internal logic of the investment process.
When do you buy or sell? When do I buy? When do I sell? These are the questions that keep
investors and traders up at night. Yet there is no reason why the buy and sell process should be a
melodrama. Obsessing about when to buy or sell keeps your limited time focused on things you
can't control. For example, Apple has been trading between one hundred and one hundred twenty for
six months. All of a sudden, Apple jumps or breaks out to a price level of one hundred thirty.
That type of upward movement from a range is an entry trigger for trend following strategy.
They think, I might not know that Apple is going to continue upward, but it's been going sideways
for a while, and all of a sudden, the price has jumped to one hundred thirty. I'm not in this
game to try and find bargains or cheap places to buy. I'm in this game to follow trends,
and the trend is up. One trend trader outlined the simplicity. As our systems are designed to
send a buy or sell signal only when a clear trend develops. By definition, we never get in
at the beginning of a trend or get out at the top. If your goal is to ride a trend that starts at
fifty and goes up to one hundred, it does not make a difference whether you got in at fifty-two
or sixty or seventy. Even if you got in at seventy and the trend went up to one hundred,
you still made a lot. Now, if you got in at fifty-two, and how you think you might predict
the bottom I will never know, you made more money than if you got in at seventy.
There are plenty of traders out there who think, oh, I couldn't get in at fifty-two,
so I won't get in at all, even if I have the chance to get in at seventy.
Richard Dennis smacks that thinking. Any time the market goes up a reasonable amount,
say a strong day's work, after you put on a position, it's probably worth adding to that
position. I wouldn't want to wait for a retracement. That is everyone's favorite technique,
to buy something strong that retraces. I don't see any justification in the statistics for that.
When beans are at eight dollars and go to nine dollars, if the choice is to buy them at nine
dollars or buy them if they retrace to eight dollars eighty cents, I'd rather buy them at
nine dollars. They may never retrace to eight dollars eighty cents. Statistics would show that
you make more money buying them and not waiting for a retracement.
Even if people are somewhat familiar with Dennis's approach to trend trading,
they still love the entry obsession, a misdirection of energy and focus.
Sakoda dead-panned, the entry is a big concern before it happens, a small concern thereafter.
He is saying, after you are in the trade, entry price isn't important. You have no idea how high
the market is going to go or not. You should be concerned about protecting your downside in
case the market goes against you, as opposed to creating drama associated with the perfect entry.
After all, trend following trades can last extended time frames. Positions held for two
to four months are not unusual, and some have been held for more than one year,
says a spokesman. Historically, only thirty to forty percent of trades have been profitable.
The words of the great baseball player Ted Williams immediately come to mind,
hitting a baseball, I've said it a thousand times, is the single most difficult thing to do in sport.
If Joe Montana or Dan Marino completed three of every ten passes they attempted,
they would be ex-professional quarterbacks. If Larry Bird or Magic Johnson made three of
every ten shots they took, coaches would take the basketball away from them.
How is it possible to make money with only forty percent winners?
Trend following firm Campbell & Company is clear. Say, for example, on the sixty percent,
you lose one percent of your capital, but on the forty percent winning trades you make two percent.
Over longer periods of time, say a year or more, this would net twenty percent on a broadly
diversified program. Trend following rules to enter and exit are driven by what is commonly called
technical indicators. The technical indicator for trend following strategy is price action,
that is, breakout, moving average, etc. However, many remain preoccupied with hundreds upon
hundreds of other indicators that promise prediction. They debate non-stop, which is
better, always assuming there must be something better. And they always yell at me that I didn't
provide them the secret. Technical indicators, however, are small components of the overall
trading system. They are some of the tools needed in the trading toolkit, but not the
kit itself. A technical indicator accounts from maybe ten percent of the overall trading success.
When some trader opines, I tried indicator X and found it was worthless, or I tried indicator Y
and found it useful. That makes no sense. These statements imply an indicator is the actual trading
system. By itself a technical indicator is meaningless. That means the suits that come
on CNBC every week to talk technicals are meaningless? Yes. When do you get out of a
loser? The time to think most clearly about why and when to exit is before getting in.
In any trading system, the most important thing is to preserve your capital. A preset
sell strategy gives you opportunity to not only preserve capital, but also redeploy into more
opportune markets. When do trend traders get out of a losing position? Fast. This is fundamental
to trend following. The logic of cutting losses, and then cutting them even more,
has been around far longer than trend following. As Bernard Baruch notes,
if a speculator is correct half of the time, he is hitting a good average.
Even being right three or four times out of ten should yield a person a fortune
if he has the sense to cut his losses quickly on the ventures where he is wrong.
For example, you enter GOOG with a two percent stop loss. This means if you lose two percent,
you exit. Period. Get out. Don't debate it. Look back at the British pound trade in my chapter 2
DUN profile. That chart, see figure 2.3 in the supplemental PDF, shows the constant starts and
stops. DUN keeps receiving entry signals and then exit signals. The trend is up and then it is
down. He enters and then exits. DUN knows he can't predict the direction of the British pound.
He only knows he has received an entry signal, so he gets on board. Then he receives an exit
right after that, so he gets out. Then another entry signal, then another exit.
DUN did say he rides the bucking bronco. Traders call these back and forth swings
whipsaws. Whipsaws are quick ups and downs that go nowhere. Your trade is jerked or whipsawed
back and forth, causing small losses due to lack of sustained trends.
Sakota says the only way to avoid whipsaws is to stop trading. See his Whipsaw Song on YouTube.
Whipsaws are part of the game. Don't want to live with them? Don't trade.
An old pro trader sent in a great story about his days at trend following incubator Commodities
Corporation that makes the point. Back in the early 90s, Commodities Corporation,
CC, brought a few Japanese traders in for some in-house training. Of course, the ultimate and
true goal was to capture some big Japanese money. I was still in their good graces and CC asked me
to have lunch with a couple of these gentlemen. They were new to the program and I hoped to
give them some insight into how I handled the process of trading. I told them they had to
come up with a method or system that fitted who they were. Then I told them I thought it
was great to find a mentor and I was available any time they had questions or issues,
and that is still me today. I then began to discuss how important risk management was
and that I was willing at that time to risk only one percent per bet in dealing with public money.
I am more aggressive today, but that was then. I told them that losses were part of the process
in finding winners. I will never forget as long as I lived the youngest trader looked me
square in the eye and with a very puzzled look asked, you have losses? I knew right then
these birds had a very long way to go and I often wondered what happened to them. Guaranteed
that young trader moved into another profession. When do you get out of a winner? You have seen
the headline hype. Use Japanese candlesticks to spot reversals or determine support and resistance
or learn proper profit-taking. Stop. You can't spot reversals until they happen.
There is no way to define the concept of support and resistance as one hundred people could have
one hundred different definitions. These directions all try to do the impossible. Predict. Tom Basso
slams profit objectives. A new trader approaches an old trend follower and asks, what's your
objective on this trade? The old trend follower replies that his objective is for the position
to go to the moon. Exiting a winning position can be a challenge because you have to be comfortable
with letting a trend run as far as it can, crest, and then begin to decline before considering
an exit with profits. Say you are up one hundred percent in paper profits. If you cash in, those
paper profits become real. But you have made a big mistake because you limited yourself in how much
you could make. If you are long several positions and there are huge open profits on the table
and the trend is still up, that is not the time to get out of a winner.
Profit targets cap profits. For example, you enter at one hundred and before you ever enter,
you establish you will exit if the price reaches a twenty five percent gain or one hundred twenty
five. The idea of a profit target sounds wise at first blush. However, if you are riding a trend,
you have to let it go as far as it can go. You need to fully exploit the move. You don't
want to exit at one twenty five and watch the trend go to two twenty five.
Although profit targets keep you from getting to two twenty five, they also play a damaging role
in the overall trend following portfolio. Trend following needs those home runs to pay for its
whipsaw losses. If you are artificially creating a profit target for no other reason than comfort,
you are limiting potential for big trends. This in turn limits the ability to cover the small
losses you've incurred. If you had used profit targets, there is no way you would have been
around to win the huge profits from the events described in chapter four. Trend following
profits come from the meat or middle of a trend. See figure ten point one in the supplemental
PDF. Your trading system. When you mechanize a trend following trading system, you take all
discretionary judgments and build them into rules. For example, if you are uncomfortable with a high
level of risk, you make a rule that sets a tolerable risk level. If you trade a currency
only portfolio, you make rules for that contingency from the outset. The logic is to hardwire all
scenarios you could possibly see in advance across your portfolio. If a market rises one hundred
percent in short order, you have rules that dictate the action to take. If a market loses
ten percent, follow the rules. You must have an unambiguous plan established in advance.
It also helps to constantly be aware of the downside. Larry Hight gives that legendary
stoic perspective. We approach markets backwards. The first thing we ask is not what we can make,
but how much can we lose. We play a defensive game. Frequently asked questions.
FACT 1. STARTING CAPITOL
Ed Sukota was once asked how much money someone should have before starting to trade. He responded,
Good money management is equity and variant. I'd ask a trader who thinks he needs a certain amount
before he can trade exactly what amount he would need to stop trading. There is no dollar amount
too little or too big that allows you to sit back and assume your starting capital alone is the
secret. Numerous factors related to starting capital exist, not least of which is the personal
discipline and ability to stick with it. Anyone who promises a certain amount of starting capital
needed to win is full of it. However, what if you have unlimited resources?
Rich can be a benefit or strike against you. Yaromir Yager, the famous hockey player and
trend trader William Eckhart, have polar views on starting capital. Yager is the riverboat gambler.
He doesn't play the stock market, but romps through it. Last year, published reports
estimated he took a hit, loss, of anywhere from $8 million to $20 million in the dot-com market.
He doesn't just have a girlfriend who is pretty and bright. He has a girlfriend who was former
Miss Slovakia and a second-year law student. Yager might be a great hockey player, but his
approach is straight to the poorhouse. Backed by the millions he made playing hockey, Yager is the
trader Eckhart avoided. I know of a few multimillionaires who started trading with inherited
wealth. In each case, they lost it all because they didn't feel the pain when they were losing.
In those formative first years of trading, they felt they could afford to lose. You're much better
off going into the market on a shoestring, feeling that you can't afford to lose. I'd rather bet on
somebody starting out with a few thousand dollars than on somebody who came in with millions.
Consider net worth examples of trend-following traders that started as one-man shops.
Bruce Kovner is worth over $5.3 billion. John W. Henry is worth $2.1 billion.
He used his trend-following gains to buy the Boston Red Sox for $700 million.
Bill Dunn made $80 million in 2008 when the rest of the world was blowing up.
Michael Marcus turned an initial $30,000 into $80 million. He also taught Bruce Kovner. Marcus
was a student of Ed Secotas. David Harding is worth over $1.387 billion. Kenneth Tropin made
$120 million in 2008 as buy-and-hold collapsed. Earlier in his career, he led John W. Henry's
firm. That is inspirational. A small fraction of those huge fortunes is motivating, if you
still have a pulse. Fact 2. Trend-following for Stocks
One of the great myths about trend-following is it does not work on stocks. This is 100% false.
Trends in stocks are no different than trends in currencies, commodities, or futures.
Jerry Parker's trend-following firm, for example, has adapted its system to stock trading,
and he is not alone. For example, David Harding. He notes his system works well with stocks,
particularly stocks in outlier moves that are in single industries.
Bruce Terry, a disciple of Richard Doncian, dismisses out of hand the Not for Stocks meme.
Originally, in the 1950s, technical models came out of studying stocks. Commodity Trading
Advisors, CTA, applied these to futures. In the late 1970s and early 1980s,
stocks were quiet and futures markets took off. That is how the CTA market started.
It has come full circle. People are beginning to apply these models to stocks once again.
From my Leave No Stone Unturned research, I am reminded of the opening line I found in the
Managed Accounts Reports article from 1979. Trading stocks and commodity futures by means
of trend-following techniques is an art with a long history. Fact 3. Computers and Curve Fitting
Larry Hite knows a computer can't get up on the wrong side of the bed in the morning,
which is why computers handle his decision-making and implementation of his trading rules.
If your boyfriend or girlfriend breaks up with you, you'll feel one way. If you get engaged,
you'll feel another way. Hite would much rather have one smart guy working on a
lone Macintosh than a team of well-paid timekeepers with an army of supercomputers.
At the same time, however, Hite is adamant the real key to using computers successfully
is the thinking that goes into the computer code. When someone asked him why go the computer route
when people power is so important, he replied, because it works. It's countable and replicable.
I'm a great fan of the scientific method. And the other things are not scientific.
If I give you the algorithms, you should be able to get the same results I did.
That, to me, means a great deal. However, technology can over-optimize or curve-fit
a trading system to produce something that looks great on paper alone.
Barbara Dixon, a Danxian student, notes,
When designing a system, I believe it's important to construct a set of rules
that fit more like a mitten than like a glove. On the one hand, markets move in trends.
But on the other hand, past results are not necessarily indicative of future performance.
If you design a set of rules that fit the curve of your test data too perfectly,
you run an enormous risk that it will fizzle under different future conditions.
A robust trading system, one that is not curve-fit, must ideally trade all markets at all times
in all conditions. Trend following parameters or rules must work across a range of values.
System parameters that work over a range of values are considered robust.
If the parameters of a system are slightly changed and the performance adjusts drastically,
beware. For example, if a system works great at 20 but does not work at 19 or 21,
that system is not robust. On the other hand, if a system parameter is 50 and it also works at 40
or 60, the system is much more robust and reliable. Trend trader David Druze has long
championed robustness in trading systems. He dismisses trades of short-term traders who
fight for quick-hitting arbitrage-style profits as pure noise. Traders who focus on short-term
trading often miss the longer-term trends. Those trends where long-term trend following
often bags its biggest opportunities. To wait like that, you need complete faith in your
trading system. However, you are in serious trouble if all you think you need to succeed
at trading is the latest hardware and software. As Barbara Dixon warns,
contemporary databases, software, and hardware allow system developers to test thousands of
ideas almost instantaneously. I caution these people about the perils of curve-fitting.
I urge them to remember one of their primary goals is to achieve discipline,
which will enable them to earn profits. With so many great tools, it's easy to change or
modify a system and to develop indicators rather than rules. But is it always wise?
It is easy to get caught up in the computer program hype. Advertisements run nonstop everywhere,
promising instant riches. Fancy charting software will make you feel like master of the universe,
but that is false security. When describing his early trading successes, John W. Henry made it
clear it was philosophy, not technology. In those days, there were no personal computers
beyond the apple. There were few, if any, flexible software packages available.
These machines, far from being the ubiquitous tool seen everywhere in the world of finance
and the world at large today, were the provinces of computer nerds. I set out to design a system
for trading commodities, but things changed quickly and radically as soon as I started
trading. My trading program, however, did not change at all. As I said, it hasn't changed
even to this day. One of Henry's long-time associates elaborated. Originally, all of
our testing was done mechanically with pencil and graph that turned into lotus spreadsheets,
which was still used extensively in a lot of our day-to-day work. With the advent of some
of these new modeling systems like SystemRider, DayTrader, and some of the other things,
we've been able to model some of our systems on these products, mostly just to backtest what
we already knew, the trend following works. Tom Basso clarifies. You'll find that the
more you're computerized, the more markets you'll be able to handle. Computers leverage
your time if you know how to use them. And Richard Donchin makes clear that time needed
to execute successfully is a trend following trader. If you trade on a definite trend
following loss-limiting method, you can trade without taking a great deal of time from your
regular business day. Because action is taken only when certain evidence is registered, you
can spend a minute or two per market in the evening checking up on whether action taking
evidence is apparent and then, in one telephone call in the morning, place or change any orders
in accord with what is indicated. Furthermore, a definite method, which at all times includes
precise criteria for closing out one's losing trades promptly, avoids emotionally unnerving
indecision. The minute or two Donchin refers to takes preparation time. After you test your system
and are satisfied with results enough to begin trading, the work is still not done.
System results must be periodically compared to actual results to ensure that testing closely
reflects real time. It is also helpful to keep a journal to record how well you stick to executing
your system. One trend trader trained at Commodities Corporation told me,
Early in my trading career, I found myself hung up on the need to be right rather than the desire
to make money. I learned early that being right of having a high percentage of winners
had very little to do with my overall trading success. Those who have a need to be right with
a high percentage of winners will find themselves passing on their best trading opportunities
assuming they use some degree of discretion in their trading selections. One of my trading
buddies enjoys a trading success rate annually of around 15% winners with 50% losers and 35%
break-even trades. In 2005, he made over 300% on his initial beginning of year trading capital
of a seven-figure account. This is a risk-reward numbers game and most who think it is something
else usually face a forced awareness at some point in their trading careers. To further emphasize my
point, everyone has seen ads on the internet for systems being promoted at 90% accuracy.
I bet three quarters of these systems are based on a set of past criteria that have very little
to do with their future performance. Let's say you do 100 trades in a calendar year.
The average winning trade makes a net $100 so you make a net $9,000 in the winners.
Now the bad news is the 10 losing trades are for $1,000 so you lose a total of $1,000 for
the year in a system that had 90% winners. Now I realize this is a stretch from reality
but mathematically this is what happens once a trader commits capital to the so-called
sure thing trading systems. Trend following legend Ken Tropin was even more specific.
In order for a system to be successful it has to be what I call robust.
Robust means I can test that system in a market I designed it around. Say I'm using it in the
treasury bonds and then if I switch that market and try that system in the euro it still works
and if I change its parameters it still works and if I switch it over to corn
something totally different than treasury bonds it still works and if I look at some data that
was out of sample from what I designed it around it still works. Then I have something
that might be interesting and have a chance of living in the future because the nature of data
is it changes a little all the time and so the key to success in systems trading is to have what
I call a loose fitting suit. I can't have a suit that's so tight and perfectly proportioned to me
that if I gain two pounds it won't fit the data anymore. Andrew Lowe of MIT brings it back to
simplicity. The first rule of thumb being that no matter how complex and subtle a strategy is
and no matter how sophisticated it might be it has to be possible to describe that strategy in
relatively simple and intuitive terms to a sophisticated investor. In other words regardless
of how subtle and impressive and sophisticated the strategy is I've never come across anything that
couldn't be described in relatively straightforward terms as to what the value added of that
strategy was. Fact four day trading limits. When you trade with higher frequency the profit you
earn per trade decreases while transaction costs stay the same. This is not a winning strategy
however many traders believe that short-term trading is less risky. Short-term trading by
definition is not less risky as evidenced by the catastrophic blowouts of Victor Niederhoffer and
long-term capital management LTCM. Do some short-term traders excel? Yes. However think about the
likes of whom you might be competing with when you are trading short-term such as Jim Simons
and Toby Crabble. Professional short-term traders the HFT guys have hundreds of staffers working
as a team 24-7. They are playing for keeps and looking to eat your lunch in the zero-sum world.
You don't stand a chance Mr. Day Trading Dreamer. But day trading flaws are invisible to many.
Sumner Redstone billionaire CEO of Viacom talked of constantly watching Viacom stock price hour
after hour day after day. Although Redstone is a brilliant entrepreneur and has built one of the
great media companies his obsession with share price is pointless. Redstone might see his company
is undervalued but staring at the screen will not boost it. Fact five wrong way to view a trade.
Leo Malamud is chairman emeritus to the CME episode number 265 on my podcast. He is recognized
as the founding father of financial futures. He was named to the top 10 most important Chicagoans
in business of the 20th century. Yet with this tremendous resume and success he is clearly not
a trend following trader. The Hunt Silver debacle also provided the setting for my worst trade.
My company partner George Fawcett and I had become bullish on silver beginning in June 1978
when it was trading around $5 an ounce level. We were right in the market and silver prices moved
higher. In September 1979 silver reached the high price of $15 an ounce and the profit we were each
carrying was substantial. George and I had never before made that kind of money. It was truly a
killing. How much higher would silver go? Wasn't it time to take the profit? Large profits,
as I learned, were even more difficult to handle than large losses. I had a very good friend,
with special expertise in the precious metals markets. Since he knew I was long silver,
I ventured to ask him his opinion. Well, Leo, he responded, you have done very well with your
silver position and I really can't predict how much higher silver will go. But I'll tell you
this, at $15 it is very expensive. On the basis of historical values, silver just doesn't warrant
much higher prices. I never doubted that he gave me his honest and best opinion. I transmitted this
information to George and we decided that if nothing happened by the end of the week,
we would liquidate our positions and take our profits. That's exactly what we did.
This was in late October 1979. So why was this my worst trade when in fact it was the biggest
profit I had ever made up to that time? Because within thirty days after we got out of our
position, the Hunt Silver Corner took hold. It did not stop going higher until it hit $50
an ounce in January 1980. George and I had been long silver for nearly two years,
and had we stayed with our position for just another thirty days, we would have been forced
to take a huge profit. We both vowed never to calculate how many millions we left on the table.
I can see why his 1979 silver trade was his worst trade. He described no predefined entry criteria.
He never gives a reason why he and his partner were bullish on silver in 1978,
nor does he explain why he entered the silver market other than it was at such a low price
$5. When the price of silver started to increase, he attempted to find out how high it would go,
which is impossible. However, because he had no clearly defined exit rationale,
he was uncertain when to get out. Without an exit strategy,
Malamed fell back on conventional trading wisdom that buying higher highs is wrong.
He attempted to use fundamentals to justify that silver would not continue to increase,
and then set a profit target to get out. By having a profit target instead of an exit plan,
Malamed lost out on millions of dollars of profit. Now, he has had a fantastic career,
but his trade example contrasts sharply with trend following.
Rob Romain brings it back to preparation. The value of a disciplined trading systems approach
is that it allows you to design your strategy during non-stressful times.
Then, when the markets are tough, you need only to execute your plan rather than being
forced to face difficult decisions under pressure when you are most likely to make mistakes.
Let me state emphatically the big picture point. If you are sitting in front of 20 monitors,
pretending to be master of the universe, like Bobby Axelrod and Billions, and imagining you
can watch all those screens simultaneously and react cat quick to thousands of pieces of real-time
data, give me a break. You can't, even though this guy, seen in the picture in the supplemental
PDF, would argue vociferously for his supernatural monitor scanning skills. Summary food for thought.
Money is how you keep score. You and Kirk, have we changed things on the basis of what happened?
The answer is no. We did not lose the faith. We are always grounded in research and coming up
with new ideas. If a model is losing money, but is within the statistical expectation,
you can't just chop and change everything because you have a period of poorer performance.
Paul Tudor Jones. I teach an undergrad class at the University of Virginia, and I tell my students,
I'm going to save you from going to business school. Here, you're getting a hundred grand
class, and I'm going to give it to you in two thoughts, okay? You don't need to go to business
school. You've only got to remember two things. The first is, you always want to be with whatever
the predominant trend is. You don't ever want to be a contrarian investor.
Larry Tantarelli. My biggest winners over time have come from two signals,
crossing over 200 SMA and new 52-week highs. That's it.
Josh Hawes and Paul King. The four ways to make money trading, making money when price moves,
making money when price does not move, arbitrage, market making slash scalping slash high-frequency
trading. Chef Godin. If someone needs direction, don't give them a globe. It'll merely waste their
time. But if someone needs to understand the way things are, don't give them a map.
They don't need directions. They need to see the big picture.
Leo Tolstoy. The two most powerful warriors are patience and time.


# Chapter 24

These are the sidebar quotations from Chapter 10.
Sometimes, a cigar is just a cigar, attributed to Sigmund Freud.
At the end of the day, your job is to buy what goes up and to sell what goes down, Paul
Tudor Jones.
It's much too early to tell.
I think all we've learned is what we already knew, is that stocks have become like commodities,
regrettably, and they go up to limit and they go down to limit.
And we've also known over the years that when they go down, they go down faster than they
go up, Leon Kuperman.
The best place to live on this curve is the spot where you can deal with the emotional
aspect of equity down-draw required to get the maximum return.
How much heat can you stand?
Money management is a thermostat, a control system for risk that keeps your trading within
the comfort zone, Gibbonsburg.
We see about 3,000 inbound referred opportunities per year.
We narrow that down to a couple hundred that are taken particularly seriously.
There are about 200 of these startups a year that are fundable by top VCs.
About 15 of those will generate 95% of all the economic returns.
Mark Andreessen.
It turns out that you don't need hundreds and hundreds of securities to be diversified.
Much of the effect of diversification comes with 20 or 30 well-selected securities.
A number of studies have shown that the number of stocks needed to provide adequate diversification
are anywhere from 10 to 30.
Mark S. Resabzinski.
People tend to use discretion or gut feeling to determine the trade size.
David Druze.
A man provided with paper, pencil, and rubber eraser and subject to strict discipline is,
in effect, a universal machine.
Alan Turing.
Volatility, risk, and profit are closely related.
Traders pay close attention to volatility because price changes affect their profits and losses.
Periods of high volatility are highly risky to traders.
Such periods, however, can also present them with opportunities for great profits.
There is no such thing as a risk-free investment.
The real issue is not whether you want to take risk, but which risks and how many of
them you are willing to accept, Jim Little and Sol Waksman.
If you have a $100,000 account and you're going to risk 5%, you'd have $5,000 to lose.
If your examination of the current charts shows that the price movement you're willing
to risk equals $1,000 per contract, then you can trade five contracts.
If you want to risk 10%, then do 10 contracts.
Craig Pauli.
Large events happen more often than you would expect in systems that exhibit power law distributions.
Department of Physics, UC Santa Barbara.
I learned not to worry so much about the outcome, but to concentrate on the step I was on and
to try to do it as perfectly as I could when I was doing it.
Steve Wozniak.
Talk is cheap.
Show me the code.
Linus Torvalds.
There is a random distribution between wins and losses for any given set of variables
that defines an edge.
In other words, based on the past performance of your edge, you may know that out of the
next 20 trades, 12 will be winners and 8 will be losers.
What you don't know is the sequence of wins and losses, or how much money the market
is going to make available on the winning trades.
This truth makes trading a probability or numbers game.
When you really believe that trading is simply a probability game, concepts like right and
wrong or win and lose, no longer have the same significance.
As a result, your expectations will be in harmony with the possibilities.
Mark Douglas.
If you look at the past 30 years, there is only one fundamental investor who has consistently
produced huge absolute returns, Warren Buffett.
Compare that, however, with countless trend following traders who have outperformed
throughout bull and bear market cycles.
One of the keys of our success is to have a huge diversification of over 100 financial
and commodity markets.
A systematic, mechanical approach is the only way to successfully trade so many markets.
Every decision, from market entry, position sizing, stop placement, must be fully automated.
Christian Baha.
It's not how right or wrong you are that matters, but how much you make when right
and how much you do not lose when wrong.
George Soros.
The Pareto Principle, the 80-20 rule, the law of the vital few states that, for many
effects, roughly 80% of the effects come from 20% of the causes.
Wikipedia.
In limiting risk, people also limit the opportunity for gain.
It is common today for investors to own six or eight mutual funds, each of which is likely
to be invested in hundreds of stocks.
This will, they hope, assure that no little bump, no little meltdown overly upsets their
portfolios.
But since when was investing about avoiding the bumps?
Roger Lowenstein.
What are the three best market indicators?
In order, they are, one, price, two, price, three, price.
The good thing about science is that it's true, whether or not you believe in it.
Neil deGrasse Tyson.
You've got to think about big things while you're doing small things, so that
all the small things go in the right direction.
Alvin Toffler.
People, they love blood, they love action.
Not this talky, depressing, philosophical bullshit.
Michael Keaton.
Birdman.
You are buying and selling risk.
As a technical trader, that's the only way to look at it.
Mark Van Stolk.
It became evident that the most direct way to make money, and the one most compatible
with my strengths, was to be a position trader using computer models to develop the entry
and exit points.
Michael J. Clark.
Alvin's biological function is to preserve and promote life and to postpone its
extinction as long as possible.
Thinking and acting are not contrary to nature.
They are, rather, the foremost features of man's nature.
The most appropriate description of man as differentiated from non-human beings is,
A being purposefully struggling against the forces adverse to his life.
Ludwig von Mises.
I have no ego in the stock market.
If I make a mistake, I admit it immediately and get out fast.
If you could play roulette with the assurance that whenever you bet a hundred dollars, you
could get out for ninety-eight dollars if you lost your bet, wouldn't you call that
good odds?
I never bought a stock at the low or sold one at the high in my life.
I am satisfied to be along for most of the ride.
Nicholas Darvus.
Time Magazine.
May 25, 1959.
Novice traders trade five to ten times too big.
They are taking five to ten percent risks.
On a trade, they should be taking one to two percent risks.
Bruce Kovner.
Information.
The negative reciprocal value of probability.
Claude Shannon.
I am hard pressed to recall when any sort of bubble was accurately identified in real
time on the cover of a major media publication.
If anything, the opposite is true.
Barry Ritholz.
People that work hard and legitimately do everything they can, they tend to be
luckier.
Julian Edelman.
Patriot's football team.
Whales only get harpooned when they come to the surface, and turtles can only move
forward when they stick their necks out.
But investors face risk no matter what they do.
Charles A. Joffe.
It is useful to think of yourself as an intellectual nomad, and in the world of
the nomad there is no carefully defined turf.
Thomas Friedman.
If you think about it, it doesn't matter what you do, because landings are most
likely to be average.
If a pilot had an exceptional landing, his next landing was likely to be average.
If he had a poor landing, his next landing was likely to be average also.
By slicing the data and only looking at what follows good landings and
praise, you only see part of the picture.
You must consider how data was selected before you can draw conclusions.
James Simons.
First solve the problem.
Then write the code.
John Johnson.
The obvious is always least understood.
Prince Clements von Metternich.
Nearly every time I straight from the herd, I've made a lot of money.
Wandering away from the action is the only way to find the new action.
Jim Rogers.
The idea behind digital computers may be explained by saying that these machines are
intended to carry out any operations which could be done by a human computer.
Alan Turing.
Link's Asset Management, which uses mathematical models to decide when and
which securities to buy and sell, posted a 5.1% gain on Brexit Friday in
one of its funds.
Capital Fund Management, a $7 billion firm in Paris, gained 4.2% that day
in its DISCUS fund, while Systematic Investments, the $10.2 billion fund
run by Lita Braga, gained 1.35% in its main blue trend fund, Bloomberg.
The computer model tells us when to get in and when to get out.
The computer understands what the price is telling us about the trend of the market.
All of the systems are designed to risk modest amounts of capital and to stay
with winners as long as possible.
Kentropin.
Life shrinks or expands in proportion to one's courage.
Anais Ninh.


# Chapter 25

CHAPTER XI. THE GAME.
TREAT YOUR LIFE LIKE A GAME. RAY DALIO.
Trends come and go, trend followers do, too. Some stay longer than others.
ED SACOTA. In Absolute Returns, author Alexander Anikin, stresses that trading is nothing more than
a game. There are three types of players in this game—those who know they are in the game,
those who don't know they are in the game, those who don't know they are in the game and have become
the game. If, within a half an hour of playing whatever game, and you don't know who the patsy
is, you're the patsy or the game. Throughout I have introduced traders who didn't know they
were in the game and became the game in the big events of long-term capital management,
the Bearings Bank collapse, the October 2008 market crash, and Brexit. I have introduced
traders and investors who did not know they were in the game and who pursued holy grails that never
panned out, and I introduced trend-following traders who knew they were in the game and
brought an edge to the table every time they played. If you know it's a game,
and you must know that by now, the choices are stark. Acceptance.
If you're concerned this work will create a new generation of trend-following traders,
and that impact in the markets will negatively affect the frequency, direction, and intensity
of trends, as well as an ability for everyone to make money. Take note of timeless wisdom
from trend-follower Keith Campbell. We are trend-followers, not trend-generators.
At the beginning or end of a major trend, we may provide a little bump or a minor goose,
but it will be an extremely superficial, temporary effect. He is 100% spot-on.
Recall Larry Harris in Chapter 3. Traders play the zero-sum game for numerous reasons.
Not all play to win. However, trend-following is about playing the zero-sum game to win.
And let's face it, that attitude will cause feelings of intimidation, defensiveness,
and jealousy. At the end of the day, for trend-following trading to lose its effectiveness,
dramatic changes must unfold. No more passive buy and hold.
Those believing in fundamental analysis, vast majority of market participants, would have
to switch how they invest. Will they cease buy and hope, long-only index approaches,
and start trend-following? Never. Globally, there are $80 trillion of investable assets,
and only $200 billion are in trend-following strategies. A quarter of 1% in trend-following
means no way. Start trading both long and short.
Most will not sell short due to fear, ignorance, or confusion. They trade long only. That changes
when. Index and mutual funds cease. This is hard to do with retirement programs mandating
legally that average Joe be 100% invested in certain instruments, while legally being
precluded from other opportunities. Embrace money management.
Most don't know how much to buy or how much to sell. They only worry about when to buy,
rarely thinking about when to sell. Recklessly bet 50% on one opportunity alone that could have
the odds of a coin flip? People do it all the time. Need even more proof? Las Vegas and Macau,
China. Go see both firsthand. Disprove Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky's work.
As long as there are human beings trading on markets, and regardless if robots are involved
or not, chaos will reign supreme. You want to fixate on robots and code as a game-changing
excuse? Hold on. Let me ask, who do you think programs the robots? People write the algorithms
that make the robots execute. There will always be excessive reactions up and down with trends
to exploit for the systematically inclined. End career risk. Author Jason Zweig. You might
think a fund manager's job is to beat the market, but, in fact, a fund manager's job is
to keep his job. That conflict kills trend-following acceptance on Wall Street.
What? This trend-following stuff doesn't spin off massive commissions for me?
No, Mr. Jones, you don't want that. Let me tell you about some news circulating around this
great biotech virtual reality porn penny stock. People love the fantasy.
Trust, but verify. Too many don't have an understanding about process. They trust guys
wearing $5,000 suits, no questions asked. They judge trading outcomes with zero understanding
of the skill-luck interplay. Wealth alone is not wisdom. Never forget that.
Central banking interventions go away. Seizing control of your financial futurism must,
especially in a world filled with crazed bankers hell-bent on taking what you have left.
The pressing fear? At the next bubble pop, the system won't be able to raise asset prices again
because the bullets will have left the chamber. At that moment, everyone will officially be
Japan. No more stock market wealth effect to trick investors into believing they are rich.
The jig will be up. But the real problem isn't that central bankers are out of ammunition.
The problem is they have the patient tied to the operating table with zero anesthesia,
performing Civil War era surgery. Knowing full well the odds for survival with a hacksaw
are brutal. Never, ever underestimate how crazy things can get. When does central bank funds stop?
It doesn't. Stop asking why? Too many demand narratives for market moves. They must know
why. Trend following doesn't need to know why. Let's be candid. Most are more comfortable
with the status quo, even if that means losing their life savings when the next black swan
swims in. And at least then, if the neighbors lose it all too, they can be happy in misery
together. Accepting that all of their market knowledge is faulty would predictably trigger
an investor's a mega-release of the stress hormone cortisol. Millions would rather zone out on
Netflix, bicker on Facebook, post on Instagram, send troll tweets, farm digital crops, or pretend
the next president will solve it all, then learn how to trade correctly for the chance at the
life-changing gain. Don't blame me. It's not surprising that trend following is sometimes
accused of throwing markets into disarray. Whenever a stock tanks, a bubble bursts, or scandal hits,
winning traders catch the blame nine times out of ten. The blame is never affixed to the little old
lady in Omaha who lost her life savings gambling on biotech penny stocks. The blame is never
placed on the masses that were gambling the Dow would go up forever, only to see it crater 50%.
Few take responsibility for losses, and who better to target when the mob is feeling panicky
than rich winners? Here are my favorite misconceptions that make trend following devil
incarnate evil. It trades futures, currencies, commodities, ETFs, etc. The vast majority of
trend following traders trade on regulated exchanges. We can all trade there. If we
can all go there, why is trend following singled out? Politics. It uses leverage.
Great traders use the tools at their disposal, one of which is leverage. The key is not to
overdo leverage like so many on Wall Street do time and time again. It causes worldwide panics.
Trend following does no such thing. It reacts to unexpected events. There is no crystal ball.
It doesn't invest. It trades. The markets are for trading, not investing.
The markets reward winners, not losers. We can all choose, and if we choose wrong,
it's time to look in the mirror. Giving trend following flack for making money on the downside
ignores the skill involved. Traders have always been an easy target for the press
whenever the public is looking for someone to blame for volatile markets, and the press
have singled out the short sellers. Making money in down markets is portrayed as obscene
and to blame for additional turbulence. The industry is not about bad boys manipulating
the market and gambling. It is about specific trading skills practiced by highly experienced
traders who are rewarded on performance alone. The notion that producing money in down markets
is obscene is in itself obscene. Markets have rules. You can go long or you can go short.
Serious players trying to make F.U. money deal with the rules and don't make excuses.
And if you don't know the rules, that's on you.
Jerry Parker, however, believes trend following must do better at explaining the inherent skill
set. Another mistake we made was defining ourselves as managed futures. Industry term
for trend following, where we immediately limit our universe. Is our expertise in that
or is our expertise in systematic trend following or model development?
So maybe we trend follow with Chinese porcelain. Maybe we trend follow with gold and silver or
stock futures or whatever the client needs. But a day will come when people will see that
systematic trend following is one of the best ways to limit risk and create a portfolio
that has some reasonable expectation of making money. In an unpredictable world,
trend following is the best tool to manage risk and uncertainty while possibly producing
outsized returns. The performance sets of David Harding, Martin Luke, Ken Troppin,
Lita Braga, Ewan Kirk, Bill Dunn, Jean-Philippe Bouchot, Jerry Parker, Keith Campbell,
George Krapel, and Larry Haidt, to name a few over the past 40 years, are incontrovertible facts.
Decrease leverage, decrease return. Richard Dennis's turtle students,
see my book, Turtle Trader, were originally instructed to make as much money as possible.
They had no restrictions except to shoot for home runs. They were absolute return
traders while under Dennis's guidance. However, when they went out solo to trade for clients,
there was style drift. Many accepted clients who demanded less leverage and, ultimately,
less return. Dunn Capital knows, to aim for and win big profits, trader and client must be
synchronized. Dunn is adamant about alignment. Now, there is, of course, the possibility of
turning down the leverage and trading more capital but with less leverage. That works
fine if the client will go along with you and your charging management fees because your
charging management fees on the capital and then incentive fees on the profit.
We do not charge any management fees to any of its clients. We care about the numbers that
are generated. Some might feel safer with watered-down trend following at a lower volume,
lower reward, but the true way to the change your life money is through higher volume,
higher reward. The key, regardless of leverage choice, is to be in concert,
as trend trader Jason Russell prescribes. Managers often say they are managing to
long-term objectives but act to meet short-term objectives of clients who have not spent the
time understanding what trend following means to them. As much as the managers, industry,
and regulators try to educate and illustrate, the ultimate responsibility lies in the hands
of the client. Bottom line, trend following strategies stylistically vary due to volatility
targets, leverage choices, speed, short or long-term trend targeting, and sector exposure,
narrow or widely diversified. Trader Josh Hawes summed up the choices from another vantage.
There is fund-level risk, account-level risk, trading system-level risk, and position-level
risk. Let that sink in before you leap. Fortune favors the bold.
It's more than the model, though. An associate drove home the point. Trend trading and even
trading in general isn't for everyone. As too few people check out what the day-to-day life of a
trader is like, and trend trading specifically, I strongly recommend they find out before making a
life-changing commitment. Life-changing commitment means not needing to be right. Most must be
right no matter what. They live to have others know they're right. They don't even want success.
They don't want to win. They don't want money. They want to be absolutely right. The winners,
on the other hand, they just want to win. That's not all. You commit to patience in
a trading process not structured on quarterly performance measures. You work hard to gain
experience, and great experience leads to discipline. You commit to the long term.
A real strategy might have one year when you are down 10%. The following year,
you might be down 15%. The next year, you might be up 115%. If you quit at the end of year two,
you never get to year three. That's the reality of sound strategy for life or trading.
Larry Hight paints the picture of that risk choice. Life is nothing more than a series of bets,
and bets are really nothing more than questions and their answers. There is no real difference between
should I take another hit on this blackjack hand and should I get out of the way of that
speeding and wildly careening bus? Each shares two universal truths, a set of probabilities of
potential outcomes and the singular outcome that takes place. Every day, we place hundreds,
if not thousands of bets, large and small, some seemingly well considered, and others made
without a second thought. The vast majority of the latter, life's little gambles made without
any thought, might certainly be trivial. Should I tie my shoes seems to offer no big risk,
nor any big reward. While others, such as the aforementioned speeding and wildly careening bus,
would seem to have greater impact on our lives. However, if deciding not to tie your shoes that
morning causes you to trip and fall down in the middle of the road when you finally decide to
fold your hand and give that careening bus plenty of leeway, well then, in hindsight,
the trivial has suddenly become paramount. With trend following, you commit to a big-time
decision that's not trivial, trade by yourself, seizing opportunity, or let a trend following
pro do it for you. There are pros and cons to both choices, but you won't know the best direction
until you get in the game and stop with the passive buy and hope long only everything
will all be all right, I trust the Fed implicitly, black swans are extinct, insanity.
For unlike the foundation of the efficient market theory, trend following's enduring principles
are not grounded in intricate algorithms or kept inside theorems with obvious holes.
Trend following principles are solid proof that typical strategy seen across Wall Street and
Main Street is at best built on a clumsy error or, at worst, a slick lie. Note, this was the
original ending for my first four editions, but for this fifth edition, I added extensive
new interviews and research sections.


# Chapter 26

These are the side-margin quotations from Chapter 11.
Larry Hight described a conversation with a friend who couldn't understand his absolute
adherence to a mechanical trading system.
His friend asked,
Larry, how can you trade the way you do?
Isn't it boring?
Larry replied,
I don't trade for excitement, I trade to win.
Many turtles claim the biggest reason they no longer tolerate immense drawdowns or strive
for colossal returns is because customers want a more conservative approach.
Periods of above-average performance are alternated with periods of below-average performance.
As soon as the inevitable, less attractive market environment commences, investors with
wrong expectations are likely to become disgruntled.
They will start complaining and with good reason.
They will not understand why they lose money.
Trans trend
The only way to make sense out of change is to plunge into it, move with it, and join
the dance.
Alan Watts
The broad application of these principles globally in markets all around the world
— Chinese porcelain, gold, silver, markets that exist, that don't exist today, markets
that others are making lots of money in that we're not trading — we will eventually
start broadening out and realizing that trend-following is a great way to trade.
What other way can you trade and get a handle on risk?
Jerry Parker
Markets may initially trend for fundamental reasons, but prices overshoot by ludicrous
amounts.
At some point, prices go up today simply because they went up yesterday.
Michael Platt
Future shock is the shattering stress and disorientation that we induce in individuals
by subjecting them to too much change in too short a time.
Alvin Toffler
Risk battles are one before they are ever fought.
General George S. Patton
The Sharpe ratio appears at first blush to reward returns, read good, and penalize risks,
read bad.
Upon closer inspection, things are not so simple.
The standard deviation takes into account the distance of each return from the mean, positive
or negative.
By this token, large positive returns increase the perception of risk, as though they could
as easily be negative, which for a dynamic investment strategy may not be the case.
Large positive returns are penalized, and therefore the removal of the highest returns
from the distribution can increase the Sharpe ratio.
A case of reducto ad absurdum for Sharpe ratio as a universal measure of quality.
David Harding
Everyone wants to invest when you're at new highs and making 50% a year.
Everyone says they want to get in at a 10% drawdown or a 20% or whatever, and no one
ever does.
I just want to point out that right now, here is another chance to do just that, buy us at
historical lows, and very few people are thinking in those terms.
They want to buy the lows, but never seem to.
Richard Dennis
Today is in the middle of June, and there is a lot of talk about the weather, the
grain situation, and whether it rains or snows or is dry.
I have no idea.
It's not the kind of thing I deal with.
I don't have any way to use information like that.
I don't think anyone else really does either.
If I think it is going to rain, perhaps it's an indication of how I should dress for the
day, but little else.
Optimism means expecting the best, but confidence means knowing how to handle the worst.
Max Gunther
Although this may seem like a paradox, all exact science is dominated by the idea
of approximation.
Bertrand Russell
To receive my free interactive trend-following presentation, send a picture of your receipt
to receipt-at-trend-following.com.
Our system of elite education manufactures young people who are smart and talented and
driven, yes, but also anxious, timid, and lost, with a little intellectual curiosity
and a stunted sense of purpose, trapped in a bubble of privilege, heading meekly in the
same direction, great at what they're doing, but with no idea why they're doing
it.
William de Reshowitz


# Chapter 27

Section 2. Trend Following Interviews. To act without needing a reason to sit
without knowing how to ride the current of what is, this is the primal virtue.
Chuangzi, The Second Book of the Dao. Trend Following is my fun, but along the way I
stumbled into another passion—interviews. During the writing of my second book,
Turtle Trader, and during the production of my film, By Necessity, I developed interview
skills. And in 2012, after my fourth book, The Little Book of Trading, I launched a podcast.
It has gone far beyond trading to Charlie Rowe's guest diversity.
Now, with five million-plus listens, topics run the gamut—investments, economics, decision-making,
health, human behavior, and entrepreneurship. My guests have included Nobel Prize winners,
Robert Allman, Angus Deaton, Daniel Kahneman, Harry Malkowitz, and Vernon Smith.
James Altucher, Dan Ariely, Robert Cialdini, Kathleen Eisenhart, Mark Farber, Tim Ferris,
Jason Fried, Gerd Gigerrenzer, Sally Hogshead, Ryan Holliday, Jack Horner,
Steve Kotler, Michael Mobison, Tucker Max, Steven Pinker, Barry Ritholz, Jim Rogers,
Jack Schwager, Philip Tetlock, and Walter Williams have also appeared.
I would argue that my collection of interviews with trend-following traders and behavioral
pros—the core thrust of trend-following—is second to none. That's why, with his new edition,
I include curated interviews. Think Market Wizards, but for trend-following. These
seven market pros bring the trend-following wisdom you must know.
Chapter 12, Ed Seacota. Chapter 13, Martin Luke.
Chapter 14, Jean-Philippe Bouchot. Chapter 15, Ewan Kirk.
Chapter 16, Alex Gracerman. Chapter 17, Campbell Harvey.
Chapter 18, Lassa Heja Peterson. Chapter 12, Ed Seacota.
Edward Arthur Seacota, see Chapter 2, pioneered systems trading using early punch-card computers
to test ideas. In his influential bestseller, Market Wizards, interviews with top traders,
author Jack Schwager devotes a chapter to Seacota and writes that his achievements
must certainly rank him as one of the best traders of our time.
Michael. I know you look a trend-following from not only a trading perspective but a life
perspective. Ed. I think if you're going to really be a trend-follower, you're going to
have a lot of trouble limiting it to one area, because let's say you have a trend-following
system. You say, I'm going to have a diversified portfolio, a trend-following portfolio. I'm going
to free myself up from emotions. Emotions have always been a big problem here, so I'm going
to have a diversified trend-following portfolio, or I'm going to invest in somebody else's portfolio,
and that's going to fix this emotional problem. Then what happens? Their investment or their
portfolio goes up and down, and they get emotional problems with that. You don't really fix your
emotions by having a system. What you do is you just move them upstream. You have constituents
within the portfolio that used to bother you, and they went up or down, and then now you have
a portfolio that goes up and down, so you just move the problem upstream. Ultimately, you have to
say, what is it that I'm feeling, and what do I do when I feel these things, and can I come up with
better and more useful or productive ways of responding when things goes up and down?
Eventually, you get to come to terms with that. The best trend-followers are the ones that have
made peace with themselves. This is what I do in the case of things going up or down.
With the value increasing and decreasing, this is how I behave, and this is how I act. And of course,
as you know, there are all kinds of things you can do when things go up. Some people, when something
goes up, they sell. Some people, when things go up, they buy. And when they keep going up,
some people sell more, and some people buy more. And if you go to extremes in either of those
cases, you're counterproductive, self-destructive. You've got to know how to do that, and you've
got to do it consistently. You've got to do it in your personal life. If you do these things
in your personal life as well, it supports trend-following. Because if you're not in alignment
between your overall philosophy, how you behave as a person, and you try to do trend-following,
there's going to be conflicts. And so we, in Trading Tribe, hardly ever talk about actual
trading or what the markets are doing. What we're working with is the emotional reaction
to volatility, or emotional reaction to loss, or to structure, or authority, or all these other
issues. If people straighten these things out, their relationships with their significant others
or their children get better. They report more satisfaction in all areas of life. And, oh,
incidentally, their trading is getting better. They don't quite know how that happened, but
they've turned into a person that now can cope with uncertainty and can cope with volatility,
and they couldn't do it before. You can't take a system and use that to medicate your feelings.
Some people say, I'm just going to suppress my feelings. Stiff upper lip approach,
grin and bear it, or clench your teeth and hope for the best.
I tend to go the other way. What's the positive intention to these feelings? Celebrate them.
Find out the positive intention, and as soon as you do that, the feeling disappears,
and you go on to the next feeling. I'm more of the go-with-the-flow on the feelings as well.
There's a lot of different approaches. By now, after we've been doing this a couple of decades,
we're developing a body of knowledge on how to do this, and to what extent can we
actually reprogram response patterns, and we're getting pretty good at this.
You can follow what we're doing. I've put it all on my blog at www.sakota.com.
All of this is free if people want to go on there, and we're documenting the growth of all kinds of
people that are using this technology, and it seems to be, to the extent they use it,
working pretty well for them. Michael.
It always seems to me the place that one is trying to find is just some peace and contentment,
to be able to sit in a room and not have this anxiety, worrying constantly.
And if one has that, to work on that. I see parallels to your work in meditation
when I read Zen scholars like Alan Watts. It seems like there's commonalities with some
of your work in the Eastern thought process. Do you see that?
Ed. I believe every feeling has a positive intention. For instance, if you're in the
house and you smell smoke, you hear crackling sounds and notice the temperature going up in
the room, and you conclude that maybe the house is on fire. That would be a really
good time to feel anxiety, take some action, and respond to it.
I'm not so sure you want to medicate your mind and nesthetize yourself and put yourself into
a meditative state where you don't respond. That's not really what I'm saying.
You want to notice the feeling you're having in the moment and act appropriately,
and you want to learn the difference between medicating a feeling and responding to it
proactively. I'm not suggesting you always aim towards peacefulness. Sometimes you want
to get busy. You might want to get busy and put a trade on, or you might want to get busy and take
some corrective action, some risk control. Or you might want to take some action and
get into some opportunity. Whatever it is, you can learn to come into harmony with your feelings,
and to some extent, it's nice to just be able to be peaceful and watch your feelings and
watch your mind, and rest. It's important to rest, particularly when you feel tired.
I don't recommend using either Trading Tribe technology, which I call TTP, the Trading Tribe
process, or anything else for medicinal purposes like a drug or alcohol or a sedative. There's
a difference between using any of these technologies as a sedative, and I don't think
any of the Zen masters really recommend blissing out and staying there permanently.
I think they want to be a little bit responsive and proactive to whatever
feeling arises in the moment. Michael. I love constant learning. What's
the better way to handle expressing oneself? There's always a better way to do it.
Ed. I think so. I try. We're here in the moment. I'm learning something from you and I'm trying
to be responsive. I'll think about this later and say, oh, man, I really could have said that
better. But that's how life is. I do the best I can in the moment, and then I go back and
maybe do it differently next time. I try to learn and study my responses and say,
can I change the response? And that's what we do in the Trading Tribe. We try to look
at what our responses are to our feelings, and then we practice identifying what it is
we are doing, how are we getting the results we're getting, and can we change our response
patterns and get different results next time around? Michael. The only way you can learn
is to extend yourself in front of somebody who has more experience. And once you extend
yourself, there's the chance that you might be forced to learn something that makes you feel like,
wow, why didn't I just say it that way? I could have said it the way he just told me.
But you wouldn't get to the point of knowing the better way until you've
extended yourself the wrong way. Ed. You've set up an environment in which
the goal is for people to help each other improve. This is true in the Trading Tribe,
and some companies have this down pretty well. Some other organizations, too, where personal
growth becomes important. People may correct you or offer advice, and you say,
thank you for helping me learn something. In a lot of situations, somebody will correct
you or give you advice, and then you get upset about it. You may say something to protect
yourself, put them down, swear at them, tell them to keep their distance or whatever.
When you have an expansive economy and a company that's growing,
everybody's trying to do better than the culture in that company. When you have growth,
when you have a free competition society and free competition, you have a competitive startup firm.
And somebody says to somebody else, there's a better way to do this, and they say,
thank you for telling me. And they start doing it that way. When you get a survival company,
one that's overly restrictive and political and has regulations, you better mind your own business
and don't go talking to somebody else about what they should be doing.
The environment, in one case, is pro-personal growth and pro-learning,
and the other one is not. It's very territorial and very defensive.
You can walk into companies, and you can sense this right away. Some are open to grow,
and then they get mature. And if they start getting to the govopoli model,
and they start going the other way... Michael.
One of the things that you do in your govopoli book is talk about the strategy of trend following.
And you offer trend following as a means to cope as we move towards this
govopoli system that you see as inevitable. But I would love for you to go back in time a
little bit, if you will, because you've had an interesting career. You've had some interesting
mentors, interesting students, but there's a couple of traders in your early years that
had a really strong influence on you. I would love for you to share wisdom or memories about
two gentlemen in particular, and that'd be Amos Hostetter and Richard Doncian.
Amos Hostetter, he was at Commodities Corporation, and Richard Doncian at Hayden Stone,
two very accomplished early pioneers in the field of trend following. Ed.
I'd be glad to share what I know. I knew Doncian a lot better than Hostetter.
Doncian had noticed this system, the two-week rule in copper. The two-week rule? You buy
something when it makes highs for two weeks, and you sell it when it makes lows for two weeks.
I asked him once, how did you come up with the two-week rule? And he said, I don't exactly know,
and you're the first person that's ever asked. He said that he just kind of came up with it,
and I think that was the start of automated trend following, coming up to the two-week rule.
Before that, you can look at some of Livermore's writings, and he had another
system of pivot points. Doncian basically started the two-week rule.
Now, that won't work today. Back then, you had different characteristics in the markets.
And the two-week rule used to work in copper, and then we found that you had to lengthen those,
and maybe made the weeks longer, six weeks, or sometimes 30 or 40, 50 weeks, or much more than
that. Doncian had this system and a couple of followers in his office. He didn't always
follow it himself, but he had this system, and he had people that were religiously following
the system, and they seemed to do pretty well. I came along and I studied his rule set.
I had Doncian's rules and guidelines. And, at about that time, computers were starting to
become within reach for people to use them, although they didn't have personal computers.
They did have mainframes at some companies. And if you can believe this, I got to go
into the major brokerage house at the time on the weekend, and I had access
to their mainframe computers that they used to run the company.
There was a security guard, and there was me. And I had access to the complete computer base
of the whole company. I was just using it to do computer testing.
Michael, were you pinching yourself at that time? Ed, no, I thought it was just normal.
I want to do this research, and they said okay. In those days, nobody ever thought about anybody
trying to go in there and do anything nefarious. I was just in there doing research.
In those days, you wouldn't even think about doing something like that.
But these days, you couldn't get anywhere close to the inner workings of a brokerage house.
I used all their disks, their history, and everything. They were just sitting around in
this big room. It was a huge room with all these mainframe computers and the tape drives and so
forth. You probably have more computation power in your cell phone now. In those days,
that was quite the thing, so I would run back tests that you could now do in probably a second
or two. It would take half an hour, 45 minutes, to do one set of tests, and I was using punch
cards. It was a different era back then. Michael, during the early days, there weren't
a huge number of peers that you could bounce ideas off. You knew Donchin, but unlike today,
where there's a much wider network and people are connected on the internet, you didn't have that
then. Ed. I took Donchin's work. He had a letter that he would publish. Every week,
you would publish a letter which would have his rules on it, and it would also have a kind of
model account and you could follow along. And the idea was you would follow along and place
your orders with him. I guess that was the way that was supposed to work. I tested his
rules and came back and said, The rules internally are not consistent. You can't program all these
rules at the same time because they conflict with each other. I started taking rule sets that
were non-conflicting. I tried to tune it up and say, Here's what we can do, and I would
try different experiments with the rules. Then I would check it with some brokers and
traders in the office and I'd say, I'm going to change this. I'm going to make this system
less responsive so the market has to go up more before you start to buy it, make the time
constants longer. And people would say, That's going to make it more risky because your stops
are going to be further away. Then we would test it and we would get the exact opposite
results. All these things were very counterintuitive. I did some of the first testing and you're
right. There wasn't any standard. Now I've got this on my website and if you want to replicate
some of these tests and learn how to do it, you can. There's a template and you can do
it on your Excel spreadsheet or whatever. Enough people have done it that they all get the same
result to the penny, so I'm pretty confident I've got the right answer up there.
In those days there wasn't anybody else. I was just curious and I said, How does this work?
And Donchin had set it up as a system. I said, Okay, I'm going to simulate it.
I'll go back in the computer and see if I get the same results that Donchin's getting.
I'll try to set up a diversified portfolio and we did that. The company I was with
marketed it for a while. We had a diversified portfolio and it was all run on computer by a
service bureau. We would enter the data every day, then get the result, and then we would
put the orders in. The company I was with couldn't stick to it and they also couldn't resist the
temptation of trying to get the customers to trade more often than the system wanted them to trade.
The problem with this system was it worked and it made money for the clients,
but the problem was it made far less money for the brokerage house. Because they were used to
day traders. They were used to people coming in and lasting a few months, losing their money,
moving on, and doing something else. That's the way the brokerage house was set up.
People would come in, try to trade, lose their money, and leave.
They said, the commissions are like a tenth of what they used to be. They're just staying the
positions and this is going to wreck our business model. And so, there were all kinds of pressures
to get people to trade more often, like you pointed out in some of your letters to me.
Well, they've got fancy names for it now, like Disposition Effect. But in those days,
people just didn't want to hold on to something. It would go up a little bit and
they would want to take their profit. Went down a little bit and they wanted to add more
and hope it'll go back up. You had lots of pressure against
following systems in those days, and so I invented something that no one really wanted.
Then I left and I went out on my own. Found clients and I found that some of the most
important things was developing a relationship with the clients. So, they knew what to expect
and they knew what was going on. If the client was not aligned to it,
and if you didn't have emotional rapport and understand the system is more than the mathematics,
there was trouble. The system is the mathematics plus the willingness to follow the system.
And when you increase your worldview to include the investor himself and his emotional responses
to what's going on, is when you finally get the system to include everything.
You can design a system that works. But just going into a computer and tuning up their software
and saying, here's the right set of parameters. Well, great. You've got something that theoretically
will work for some theoretical robot that'll follow it, but there aren't a whole lot of robots that
have got money these days. Maybe someday, but right now you've got human beings with human
feelings and unless you include that into your system design, the wheels are going to come off
the cart around the corner. Michael, you sum up so much of your ethos and those last few
sentences for those paying attention. Correct me if I'm wrong, but it seems like you've been
highly motivated by the puzzle aspect of figuring things out. Ed. Yes, I like puzzles. I've got a huge
collection of what you might call barroom puzzles. These metal detanglement puzzles where you have
metal pieces that fit together and you've got to figure out how to get them apart or together.
I've got a huge collection of those and in the morning I do chess puzzles. I just like figuring
things out. That's always been something that I've enjoyed doing. I don't know exactly where
that comes from. I've been able to incorporate that in my life in such a way that it's useful.
I like the puzzle aspect of what I did in the markets or what I did with my Gavapali book.
It's what's driven me. I want to understand how it works. Then, if it works and makes money,
that's great. It's nice to make money, but I wouldn't have done it in the first place.
I'd maybe figure out some other way of making money, but the puzzle was what got me. I said,
I've got to figure this out. This guy Doncian. He's got this thing that's mechanical. It's
making money. How can that be? How can you get something that's mechanical that can make money
for nothing without doing any work? How can that be? And so I kind of got attracted to looking at
it. I don't think I would have gone into it for just the money. It was the puzzle. It was,
how does this work? How does this actually work? Can I build a model? Can I understand this? And
then when you understand it, then it becomes interesting to explain it to people for a while,
whether you put it on the website or you write a book, then you go on and look for a new puzzle.
Michael, go back in time. You're in those mainframe rooms and you're by yourself and
you're struggling. There's got to be a struggle to try and figure this all out.
Was it just pure excitement at the time, this internal excitement that was driving you to
keep going and going till you got the puzzle solved? Ed. Well, that's a good question. That's
one of the best questions I've ever heard. What motivates somebody who's a researcher?
What motivates them to go? Is it that pleasure or the puzzle? Or is it the discomfort of not
knowing? It's deeper than that. It's just that's what I do. That's what I do. I do that and I play
banjo and I get lost in it. That's my meditation. I have to do it. If I can't play music, something
dies. And the same with solving puzzles. That's who I am and that's what I do. And I don't
think of it as there's something that pushes me to do it. That's just who I am and that's
what I have to do. Michael. I sometimes feel like my career is the same way. I don't necessarily
know why. I'm just driven to do what I do and I'm not necessarily sure what I even do,
but I just do it. Ed. I like that and you're good at it. And that's one of the places we succeed in
the trading tribe when we get people to this place you're at, where you find out who you are
and what you do and you just do it. You express yourself and create a value by expressing exactly
who you are and not pretending to be somebody else. That's a very high state. Congratulations
for being there. It'd be a different world if everybody could get there and I would hope people
would follow in your footsteps. I've watched your career over many years and I've seen you keep
expanding and getting closer to who you are. And now you're really blooming and you're really
making a big contribution, so good job. Michael. I'm not going to tell the exact story,
but you influenced me greatly when I met you for the first time in 2001 and I can still remember
some of the things that you said to me. And for some people, they might have felt threatened.
I don't think I felt threatened. I was like, okay, what has he just said to me? Why is he
saying it? What's the deeper meaning? In many ways, as you talk about your love of puzzles,
I felt like you were giving me a puzzle. Michael, you might want to consider this.
And so then, of course, I just considered that. And you didn't give specific instructions. You
gave some big picture insights. That's probably how you like to be. You want to see if there's
more puzzle-finders out there. Ed. Yes, and you're open. You wanted to do something.
You wanted to go somewhere. You're on a growth path. And then you viewed ideas from
me and other people. And you've surrounded yourself with an amazing group of people
who have amazing amounts of ability, knowledge, wisdom, and resources. You've surrounded yourself
with one of the most advanced group of mentors possible. You just liked to do that. I think you
had an attraction. You attracted people like that and then you enjoyed hearing what they had to say.
The people on your podcasts and people in your life, all are people with strong opinions,
all people that make you think and make you grow. You just have some kind of an affinity
for people like that. And that's part of what makes you good at what you do. Michael.
If they keep talking to me, I should keep talking to them. That seems like a good rule.
If really smart people will agree to talk to me, I should probably talk to them because
then I wouldn't be that smart. Laughter. Ed. Laughter. It seems to be working.


# Chapter 28

These are the side margin quotations from Chapter 12.
The stock market is never obvious.
It is designed to fool most of the people most of the time, Jesse Livermore.
I'm an optimist in the sense that I believe humans are noble and honorable, and some of
them are really smart.
I have a somewhat more pessimistic view of people in groups.
Steve Jobs.
E.M.T. says everything I stand for and everything I've done my entire life is a complete waste
of time.
David Harding.
Time series Momentum represents one of the most direct tests of the random walk hypothesis
and a number of prominent behavioral and rational asset pricing theories.
Our findings present new evidence and challenges for those theories and for future research.
Knowing when to explore and knowing when to quit both have value.
Michael Covell.
Fear is only as deep as the mind allows.
Japanese proverb.
There is the plain fool who does the wrong thing at all times everywhere, but there is
the Wall Street fool who thinks he must trade all the time.
Jesse Livermore.
Investing should be like watching paint dry or watching grass grow.
If you want excitement, go to Las Vegas.
Paul Samuelson.
The three to five million dollar figure is not a random picked number.
That amount is about what we are able to recoup on the movies if we don't get a
wide release.
In a worst case scenario, we break even and maybe lose a little money but not very much
and everyone gets paid scale.
That budget is reverse engineered to thinking that if the movie isn't a wide release, at
least we get our money back and can keep our doors open.
Jason Blum.
Film producer.
In short, we suffer from an illusion of control that fools us into thinking the future
is more predictable and less uncertain than it really is.
For worse, we believe we can influence chance events through our own actions.
Spiros Macridakis.
We find that whole communities suddenly fix their minds upon one object and go mad in
its pursuit.
Then millions of people become simultaneously impressed with one delusion and run after
it till their attention is caught by some new folly more captivating than the first.
Charles McKay.
Extraordinary popular delusions and the madness of crowds.
In reading, don't let a single word escape your attention.
One word may be worth a thousand pieces of gold.
Chinese proverb.


# Chapter 29

Chapter 13, Martin Luke.
Martin Luke co-founded Aspect Capital in September 1997.
Luke oversees the research team,
which is responsible for generating
and analyzing fundamental research hypotheses
for development of all aspects investment programs.
Prior to founding Aspect,
Luke was with Adam Harding and Luke Limited, AHL,
which he co-founded in February 1987
with Michael Adam and David Harding.
Mangroup, PLC, completed the purchase of AHL in 1994.
Luke holds an M.A. in physics from Oxford University.
Michael.
I'm thinking of all the assorted conferences
that I've been at,
and I was wondering if we have crossed paths in person.
Martin.
The one I remember seeing you at,
there's a picture of it on your website.
You had Larry Hight and Ed Sakota on stage in Chicago.
You had him on stage with,
it wasn't a ukulele.
He got out his banjo.
Michael.
Yes, the whipsaw song.
You were in the audience for that.
Martin.
I was in the audience for that.
Michael.
That was probably an interesting audience.
When you're on stage for one of those things,
you're in your own little world,
and you don't realize that's a pretty interesting audience.
All trend followers at an annual event
at that moment in time.
Martin.
Exactly.
It's voyeuristic because you guys are having so much fun,
and you could be in a bar, the three of you,
and the rest of us are like voyeurs.
Michael.
I sometimes wonder if it is something that comes with age
when you loosen up,
or do you think guys like Larry and Ed
were always that way?
Martin.
A bit of both.
Obviously, I don't know Ed at all,
but Larry's always been older than me,
and that will never change.
Probably, he's always been wiser than me,
and actually, I haven't seen him for a while,
so whether he still gets wiser
or whether he's sort of plateaued
and that wisdom is enough to carry him through,
I don't know.
Michael.
Yes, I have interviews with just me and Larry in his office
that I can't release.
They're awesome wisdom,
but there's a lot of color there I can't put out.
Martin.
Yes, I can believe that.
Michael, listen, it's a pleasure finally to speak with you.
I have your book on my desk
and have owned this for many, many years,
so thank you for everything you've done for the industry.
Michael.
Well, thank you.
Thanks for the nice words.
Martin.
I'm surprised we haven't spoken.
Michael.
Yes, I should share a quick story with you.
The first time I met one of your old friends,
the head of Winton Capital,
I was in his office and it was 2005,
and we had just met.
It was just me and him and his dog.
He started pulling up a screen showing the equity curves
of assorted well-known USCTAs,
and then superimposing his equity curve,
and then just giving me that wry smile of like,
did you somehow miss me?
That was my first inkling of the London CTA scene,
so to speak.
Martin.
Yes.
Michael.
There's been an exponential explosion of all you guys.
That's just out of this world.
Martin.
It's an interesting story.
Michael.
When did you first know in your mind
this quantitative style,
this systematic style of trend following trading,
coding it and trading it over a diversified basket of markets?
When did you know in your heart of hearts
this had changed your life
or at least you knew this could make some money?
Martin.
Wow.
Michael Adam, David Harding and I
never quite had the luxury,
if you could call it that,
of having a role model.
It wasn't as though we looked out
at the investment universe and said,
I want to be that person,
or I want to do that thing.
Certainly for Michael and I,
because we go back further
than our relationship with David.
We were at boarding school together from age 13
and then we read Oxford together.
After Oxford, Michael went to work for his father
who ran a small physical commodity
broking business in London.
I went and took my first job at Nomura
trying to sell Japanese equities to European investors.
And I didn't know what an equity was
when I started that job,
clutching my physics degree.
I was just fascinated by the analysis
that Michael had started doing,
prompted by his father.
Michael's father said,
here boy, buy one of those newfangled computers.
Personal computers were just beginning
to reach the shores of the UK in the 1980s.
And Michael bought a Hewlett Packard
9816 personal computer.
His father handed him a book
of technical trading methods and said,
see whether there's anything in this.
It's really been so gradual.
Just over time I left Nomura and joined Mike.
This whole time series analysis
just lent itself to the nerdy physicist's approach.
We just discovered some things.
We tested every model that we could encode
from that great book.
We distilled them down to some fundamental rule sets.
We tried them on a range of markets
and at that time the range of markets
that we had available to us
sitting in the commodity world of London,
what did we have?
Cocoa, coffee, sugar, aluminum, copper, silver,
something like that.
The financial commodities were really in their infancy.
Only a few years later and largely once we'd met David,
we started expanding the application of these models
to a more diverse set of markets.
Michael, people love that depth.
People want to know what's going on
inside the mind of early guys.
Martin, there is no one moment where we said,
ah yes, we have created the great imitator of,
who was around in those days?
Richard Dennis, John W. Henry,
the mint gentleman, Larry Hight.
But we didn't know that.
As we started things,
we didn't know there was that U.S. industry.
Michael, mid-late 80s, Martin.
Even early 80s, I started working with Mike in 1984.
He was working for his father from early 1983.
The earliest AHL track records stretches from 1983.
We met David, I want to say in 85 or 86,
and there was a bit of a tussle.
David was working for Sabre Asset Management
and was the understudy to a great chartist,
a man named Robin Edwards who ran a fund.
Very systematic, but no computers involved.
And David was a Cambridge-trained scientist,
and he immediately saw the potential for using computers
to encode Robin's chart approach.
The Sabre folks tried to hire Mike and me
out of Mike's father's business,
and that wasn't going to happen.
So in the end, we got David to join us
in Mike's father's business.
And then, at the beginning of 1987,
there was a little family tiff,
which resulted in the three headstrong boys
leaving with one client and setting up AHL.
Michael, but at the moment you set up AHL,
had you made enough money at that moment in time
that you felt like, I've got a little breathing room,
or was it still kind of,
we're not really sure what's going to happen yet?
Martin.
We didn't have a bean, not a bean.
In fact, blood is thicker than water.
Michael's dad had built this business over the years,
and it had morphed from that commodity-broking firm
into a small asset management business
based on models the three of us were developing.
He had a very, in those days, parochial,
or patrician's approach to managing money
and to the clients.
It was just a difference of opinion.
We said, look, you can't behave that way
with your client's money.
You can't take a paternal view of it.
You have to be completely transparent,
and we set off on our own.
But we didn't have a bean,
and Michael's father actually lent Michael 20,000 pounds
that we spent on computer gear and rent
until we had generated enough fees
that we could go and rent our own office
and pay his father back.
Gosh, it was a very long time before we had confidence
in what we were doing, actually.
Michael, a two-part question.
What were you calling the style of trading
amongst yourselves that you were executing?
And number two, talk about some of the early coding
and how you went about the early coding.
This was not the age where you could walk out
and buy a trade station or a mechanic a software.
This was hard coding in the bowels, so to speak.
Martin.
Two pots to that.
What did we call it?
I don't know.
Yes, it was trend-following,
and it wasn't long before we woke up to the fact
that there was an industry here
because we had friends in the brokerage community.
Through Michael's father's connections,
there was a metal broker in London back in the 80s
called Rudolph Wolf.
The roots of our managed futures was a client
would open a managed account
and give authorization for the manager,
in our case, AHL, to manage that money.
It was brokers like Rudolph Wolf
and some of the early physical commodity brokers
that helped us and educated us
in what the rest of the industry was doing.
We knew pretty quickly that this was trend-following,
and we started to get exposure
to a much broader set of markets.
In terms of the modeling and the development,
you had, in Michael and me in particular, real techie wonks.
Certainly, I would not get a job now as a developer,
but back in the day, that's what we love to do.
Those Hewlett-Packard 9816s,
actually, the operating system was written in Pascal,
and we learned Pascal and built our models in Pascal,
and very quickly, we built an environment
that allowed you to encode trading ideas
much more simply.
You didn't need to write them all in Pascal
and compile the darn thing and blah, blah, blah.
It was effectively an inline simulation language
which got developed in the days of AHL
once we became part of the man-group,
and it was a well-funded exercise.
We had co-writers, developers
just working on that interpreted language,
so it was a precursor to many of those trade stations.
And for a while in the period between AHL
and aspect, certainly,
Mike Adam had a version of that.
Actually, it wasn't his,
but it was a similar product
that he was marketing commercially.
The software development was very much intertwined
with the model development.
Michael, I was thinking about the notion of achievement.
Everyone, if they're pushing in some way, is achieving.
We're all striving, and it's sometimes hard
to reflect on that because you're saying,
hey, we just started doing this,
and it starts working, and we just keep at it.
We keep our nose to the grindstone,
and there's some ups and there's some downs,
and the next thing you know, 30, 40 years later,
boom, boom, boom, something interesting is there.
Then for outsiders, they look back now
and see the very successful firm aspect today,
but they don't really think
about the progression, the evolution.
Martin.
That's so true of so much in life.
It's very hard to join dots when the dots don't exist.
You can join the dots with hindsight.
If I was being really glib,
there was a while where it was just the three of us,
and none of us got those fancy jobs and investment banking
that all of our slick friends at university got.
There was a period where we were three scientists,
nerding around to the models and the simulations,
the back data, some of Michael's father's money,
and heaven's this stuff works.
The more we got into it,
the more animated and the more excited we got.
So it was revenge of the nerds for a little while.
Then it was an investment bank in a box
because in the early days of AHL,
we did a number of different things,
not only model development and asset management.
Michael was already keen
on commercializing that piece of software.
I spent a fair bit of time using the software
to provide consultancy services for financial businesses,
and what came to light was that you could fairly easily
model the behavior and the profitability
of investment banks.
We did a piece of work for a London guilt trading house.
We modeled how many people their risk limits,
what kind of investment horizon.
They had the front book traders that were making a market,
and they had the back book traders
that were holding the house book, if you will,
and we modeled the behavior of those things and said,
roughly, this looks like the profitability of your business.
And the folks, the executives, their jaws dropped.
They went wide eyed
because we basically modeled their business.
We went around telling everyone, Goldman, Salomon,
just get rid of all your traders,
they're very expensive and they have hangovers.
You can build it all on computers.
We believed ourselves, of course,
but everyone thought we were completely nuts.
By and large now, that's what's happened.
Michael, today aspect is 100% systematic.
I'm guessing that there was a moment
when you're doing all this homework
in the early stages of this industry
and seeing the results,
but when did you have that aha moment?
Wow, we should really take the human discretion out
and automate this.
When was that moment?
Martin.
I draw attention to two things.
The first was just an awareness
that your ability to rationalize the available information,
if you could do that pretty quickly
and get rid of the noise,
we'd all be much better traders.
I tell a story about those early AHL days.
Mike and I came up with a game
and it was just a piece of code
that would randomly sample one of the markets
in our database and it might invert it
and it might multiply it by a random factor.
You couldn't tell what the market was,
but it would obviously keep the integrity
of the price series
and it would present a chunk of time series to you.
It would then ask you to buy or sell
and you'd buy or sell.
Then it would move forward a day
and then you'd buy or sell
and move forward a day and so on and so forth.
And with that kind of rapid-fire decision-making,
actually, we were pretty good discretionary traders.
If you blow each of those ticks up
into a 24-hour period with news coming at you
and fear and greed and the chaos of normal life,
you become a lousy trader.
That was the first inkling
that taking the emotion out of it,
just reducing it to the raw information
has to be a good thing.
The second thing turns out
to be the importance of risk management
because what a lot of people focus on
in any model development is the models.
Are you going long?
Are you going short?
How do you feel about this market or that?
And that's all well and good
and you obviously need to develop those models
and be able to articulate what the underlying drivers are,
but what many people miss
is the risk management component.
What a lot of people do is focus on systematizing models
and then portfolio construction
and or the risk management piece
they leave to discretion.
Somewhere in the genesis of aspect capital,
we realized that's absolutely a crucial thing to get right.
You need to be able to systematize
not only your models that interpret the price data
and determine the confidence
you have in that particular trend,
but you also need to be able to systematize
your portfolio construction process
and your risk management process.
The manager that says I am 95% systematic
and 5% discretionary is 100% discretionary.
That's not necessarily a bad thing.
I'm not saying there aren't geniuses out there
who are discretionary,
but it means you can't rely on the scientific process.
You can't rely on the quality and the integrity
of the simulation and research process
if there's the hint that you're just going to step in
and down gear the portfolio when the going gets tough,
or you're going to knock out a few markets
when they seem to be a little off the charts
because you can't build that into your simulation
and you can't know what you're going to do in the future.
Although we knew at the outset
that it was a good thing to systematize,
I've become more resolute in how important it is
across the entire investment process.
Michael, you talk about that notion of 95% systematic
and some proportion of discretion.
That was a very common marketing line
in disclosure documents of trend followings CTAs
for a long, long time.
It was this mysterious we're 95% systematic,
but there's also this magical 5% discretion,
which is the reason you're giving us money.
I always used to think that didn't make any sense now
because you and other peers, associates, et cetera,
have gone the opposite direction and said,
hey, hold on.
I don't think you could probably get away today
saying in the trend following space,
we're 95% systematic.
People that want to invest would probably say,
explain that.
Martin, it's really dependent on who you were talking to
and we all lived in fear in the early days
of the black box label, two things.
I think that 5% discretionary was also
to give some investors a sense.
There was a thought process
and it wasn't just this ignorant machine clunking away,
but also I come back to the point
that people built the models
and then the overall risk target of the portfolio
was something they would set discretionary
on how it felt that week, day, month, or epic.
Michael, it was a weird point in time
where we had not yet got to the point
where there was an acceptance of the 100% systematic.
There was this gray area in the marketing
and for good or bad reasons, perhaps, as you're saying.
Martin, that's exactly right.
And now it needs to be used judiciously
so the idea of being systematic,
the idea of being research driven as an investor,
as a consultant, doing your due diligence,
you've got to scratch at that
because as I give a bright young graduate
an infinite amount of data
and an infinite amount of processing power,
they're going to come up with the works of Shakespeare
or they're going to come up with models
that just look staggering.
And you and I know that you wouldn't put your money in them.
There is a difference between 100% systematic models
that are based on curve fitting,
back fitting cloud patterns, data mining,
versus 100% systematic models
that are based on rigorous hypothesis extraction testing
and a whole barrage of statistical tests
to make sure that you aren't fooling yourself.
Big, big difference.
Michael, I have to give a presentation shortly
in a country in Asia, a pretty successful city.
And I assumed they knew what I was going to talk about
and they wrote me and they said,
hey, can you bring these particular charts
for your presentation and tell us
whether or not these charts are in a trend
or not in a trend?
It's amazing that people still want
to fixate on their markets.
They're excited about their markets
and they're not even thinking about diversification.
That's not even on their horizon.
They've just got their markets they're happy about
and they want me to tell them something exciting
about them.
That's not how you look at it.
You were saying, what are the targets of opportunity?
When that opportunity arrives,
we're going to do something with it,
but we can't force it.
And I still think today,
it's still not a widely understood concept.
Martin, I think that's right.
And I've been in exactly those situations
where whether it's the local conference organizer
who's asking you to tell them
how great their local market is
or it's the drinks party where somebody's saying,
what do you think about gold?
I don't even know what country I'm in
and which way up your stock market is,
but I know it's in my portfolio.
And I know it's one of the 150 plus assets
that we monitor 24 hours a day
that we always have a position in.
And depending on how those trends have unfolded,
we will have a large position.
And depending on how those trends have unfolded,
we will have a long or a short position
and that's the beauty of it.
Many managers will have a different approach from ours,
but I start from a very high level premise
that all assets have an equal opportunity
to manifest trends.
The whole model building process
is an attempt to preserve that opportunity
and make it as broad and robust as possible.
What do I mean by that?
What I mean is that if you build your model
such that it captures some of the characteristics
of different markets,
you trade hogs subtly differently
from how you trade treasury bonds, for example,
you can persuade yourself
that you are building in some features of those markets
because clearly the world of hog traders
is different from the world of bond traders.
But the dynamics of those markets
at that level of resolution,
there is in our opinion, no persistency.
All you can say about hogs and bonds
is they have the potential to demonstrate trends.
If I had looked at, say, equity markets over,
if my data set was, this is somewhat spurious,
but let's say U.S. equity 2002 to 2007,
I could conclude that equities don't go down, not for long.
What if I looked at bonds over the last 10 years?
Bonds don't go down, do they?
Never.
You could build into your model certain biases
or certain scenario expectations,
and that's what we try and eschew.
We try and avoid those built-in biases.
I am indifferent as to whether your regional equity market
is in a roaring, bold trend,
which I know is what you want, conference organizers,
or whether it's in a terrible bear trend.
I'm agnostic as to whether it's going up or it's down,
and I don't look at how different markets
have performed historically and say,
my models are better at trading commodities
than they are at trading financials,
and therefore I overweight the financials.
I try and keep it as completely agnostic directionally
and asset allocation-wise so that it can grab hold
of any opportunity that presents itself.
Michael.
When you're talking to people after all these decades,
what percentage of the educated financial audience
do you think grasps what you do at Aspect?
Martin.
Fortunately, many more now.
This is a terrible generalization
and therefore probably not true,
but from my small vantage point,
2008 was the aha moment, and before that,
marketing what we did could sometimes be a struggle,
and you know that.
We also didn't help ourselves with the absurd fees
that we used to charge back in the 80s.
The evolution of that to making ourselves look respectable
and I want to be a hedge fund too,
all the way through to 2008,
was where as a result of performance in 2009,
the phone started ringing,
and the pension funds and the pension fund consultants
that wouldn't take our calls up until that point said,
explain again how this stuff works?
And then they were really receptive.
Of course, you can't make it up
because then, ironically,
in the aftermath of the global financial crisis,
you get a period where this stuff didn't perform
as well as it had done historically,
and as well as our expectations would have led us
to believe it can and it will.
I think the vast majority of people now get what we do,
but it wasn't until relatively recently
that that's been the state of the world.
Michael.
I put this in one of my books that T.V. Ben Stein said,
if you made money in 2008, you were doing something wrong.
Martin.
Really?
Laughter.
Michael.
I know where he's coming from.
I understand from his understanding
of assorted trading strategies or investment strategies,
and if you only believe those,
then that's a fair thing to say.
You're leaving some things out to say that,
but I just love that line.
Martin.
That is a great one,
and none of us in our industry should think,
and the respectable ones of us don't think,
that we're ever finished.
It's not like you've ever unlocked the secrets
of markets and my model is my model,
and now I'm off to the beach,
because A, the markets never leave you alone,
and B, there's always some new thing
that you hadn't thought about.
I think very topical at the moment
is the evolution of portfolio construction,
the theory and practice of portfolio construction.
The Swenson model of diversification
was not just have U.S. equities,
have global equities too.
There you go, now you're diversified.
I'm oversimplifying it,
but certainly he has had,
and as far as I know,
has no interest in quant strategies,
and at the time, that was perceived
to be a very valid and very useful form of diversification.
And in 2008, that's why you get lines like,
if you made money in October 2008,
you were doing something wrong,
because the world view was so rigid.
It's exciting, it keeps me young,
and it keeps my research team young and energized,
because there's always some new world view
that you should explore.
Michael, I've had some of the brightest
and most accomplished behavioral economists
on my podcast, and what I really find amazing
in talking to them is their work seems to be
the embodiment of traders like yourself,
your peers, the other associates in the industry.
Going down the systematic quant trend strategy path
was in many ways capturing what Daniel Kahneman
was winning the Nobel Prize for,
or what Vernon Smith was winning the Nobel Prize for.
But when I talk to them, there seems to be this disconnect
where all these behavioral economists
should be waking up to these quant trend strategies
and saying, wow, what a wealth of interesting data
and evidence for us to sink our teeth into.
But there still seems to be a wall
where they've not yet pulled the hood of the car up
and looked under there and said, interesting.
Martin, I agree, Michael, and viva la difference.
I'm very happy that those folks and the folks at Google
have not woken up to it.
But you talk about behavioral economists.
One area that has sort of fascinated me
is the building of agent models.
If you can define players in your complex system,
who are the hedgers?
Who are the speculators?
Who are the counter trend traders?
All of that.
You'd think you could come up with a bottom-up model
for the markets, which perhaps, but I don't know,
is that what behavioral economists are trying to do?
In my limited experience, candidly, don't bother.
It's a very elegant mathematical model,
but it's very unlikely to be able to make you any money.
The thing about what we do
is that it's a bit rough and ready.
The models are very sophisticated, of course,
and the mathematics is complicated.
But you almost start from the premise
that all markets will at some point display trends,
and it's our job in these models
to be able to capture those trends efficiently
and not lose money in the periods
where we're participating in those markets
and they're not trending.
There you go.
I've just defined what it is we do.
But you'll notice that I haven't dwelt on,
and it's my job to tell you why those trends exist,
where they come from and where they're going.
If you fixate too much on that,
which is the role of the behavioral economist,
very fascinating field, but it's not what we do.
Michael, they seem to do a great job
of really putting aside the efficient market theory
and offering that human beings are not always rational,
that bubbles exist.
So I look at that very basic premise.
Their work gets more complicated than that,
but their basic premise,
it dovetails right into your world
in the sense that it's a foundational explanation
for why you might be successful.
Martin.
Yes, and it is, and it makes for great reading
and often there are aha moments, as you say.
Yes, well, that's why we sophisticated monkeys
behave the way we do, and long may it continue.
Michael, the world is a very interconnected place.
Everyone is coming online.
If a country doesn't have a liquid futures market,
they're thinking about it.
They would like one.
How do you go about the process
of bringing new potential trading opportunities into aspect?
I imagine you always stay excited because you're like,
hey, we don't even know the next group of markets
from the next country that's going to come online
that can possibly offer us opportunity.
What's great about trend following in many ways,
it is the Indiana Jones of trading.
Once you have your models, your systems,
and you know these markets in these countries
are liquid and viable, you can go in.
Martin.
Yes, it's an ongoing process and something we devote
a fair bit of time and a fair bit of money to
because you've got to keep your head up.
It's relatively easy to get started
with the 50 most liquid markets out there in the world,
and if you just ignore all of the new stuff
that you're referring to, you miss a huge opportunity set.
As a business, we have a regular cycle
of reviewing news alerts and our brokers
keep us prompted of what's new, what's coming.
We like to have some back data,
so we're not going to be market participants
on day one of an exchange opening
because we've got to get the sort of characteristic heartbeat
of liquidity patterns within that market
before we can parameterize our execution algorithms.
We've got to establish a little bit of history,
and then we've got to establish a threshold of viability,
a threshold of liquidity because it's got to be worthwhile
at a certain point, having a one basis point allocation
to a market where it isn't viable in the program.
There's a liquidity threshold.
There's something like 6,000, is that right?
6,000 futures markets globally?
You can very quickly cut off 80% of those
on the liquidity basis as being viable for what we do,
and then it's an evolving cycle.
As liquidity picks up, we will adapt our allocation
in the portfolio.
And the other feature, of course,
is there may be constraints.
For example, we can't currently trade
the Chinese futures markets for our investors
because external investors are not allowed
to participate in those markets.
Similarly, access to Brazilian futures markets,
which are vastly liquid,
but there's a taxation situation
that makes them extremely difficult and expensive to trade.
So all of those markets we're tracking,
we're collecting data,
we are simulating the models on them,
and we're ready to go at the drop of a hat
should the legislation change.
We welcome that.
We love the additional diversification
that it affords the portfolio,
because back to the starting point,
if you just traded the same liquid 15 markets
that maybe we started with in the 1980s,
if that was your portfolio now
and all other things were equal,
you would have less diversification in the portfolio.
There's a long-term secular trend
towards markets becoming more homogenous over time,
I believe.
We are hungry for new access
and new opportunities of diversification.
Michael, why do you think you're so passionate?
Martin, I'm a one-trick pony, laughter.
This is what I've done in my career.
I can't claim to be a scientist or a physicist,
but that's what I studied.
I got into that because I'm inquisitive.
I like precision, I like answers,
I like engineering solutions to things.
I know myself and I would be a lousy discretionary trader.
I like the application of sophisticated
mathematical techniques and theories
to extract signal from noise,
and I love working with a bunch
of really, really smart, talented people.
All of that keeps you passionate,
to keep learning and to keep competitive
and to keep doing what you're doing better and better.
Michael, even if the economics of this was much less,
let's say it was good enough to earn a living,
I get the feeling talking to you
that this still would have been your passion and your path.
Martin, absolutely.
This is just great fun.
I didn't set out on day one to be a great trader at all.
As I said, I got into this working for Michael's father
because I was fascinated by the application
of computers to time series data.
That's what I've done my whole career.
It really doesn't matter that rewards have been very good.
That's a nice feedback loop.
Actually, markets are a very swift judge
of how precise and how honest you have been.
So?
Michael, it's how to keep score.
Martin, it's how to keep score exactly.
That means that I'm not in an amorphous world
of where people could say,
wow, what a great article you've written.
There's a score keeper.


# Chapter 30

These are the side margin quotations from Chapter 13. The burnt customer certainly
prefers to believe that he has been robbed rather than that he has been a fool on the
advice of fools. Fred Shwed. Where are the customers' yachts? The genesis of any trading
idea has to be a hypothesis about market behavior. Anthony Todd. You know the saying, human
see, human do. Julius. Planet of the Apes. 1968. Everything is worth what its purchaser
will pay for it. Publius Cirrus. The first principle is that you must not fool yourself
and you are the easiest person to fool. Richard Feynman. I grow old learning something new
every day. Salon. Athenian Statesman. The 50-50-90 rule. Any time you have a 50-50 chance
of getting something right, there's a 90% probability you'll get it wrong. Handy Rooney.
Let me remind you of the particular characteristics of all of these behavior systems that I am trying
to focus on. It is that people are impinging on other people and adapting to other people.
What people do affects what other people do. Thomas C. Schelling. Maybe we should teach school
children probability theory and investment risk management. Andrew Lowe. I know that two and two
make four, and should be glad to prove it too if I could. Though I must say, if by any sort of
process I could convert two and two into five, it would give me much greater pleasure.
George Gordon. Some of the greatest, most revolutionary advances in science have been
given their initial expression in attractively modest terms, with no fanfare. Daniel Dennett.
The past can't hurt you anymore, not unless you let it.
Halon Moore. V for Vendetta. Whenever there is a simple error that most laymen fall for,
there is always a slightly more sophisticated version of the same problem that experts fall for.
Hamus Tversky. You build on failure. You use it as a stepping stone. Close the door on the past.
You don't try to forget the mistakes, but you don't dwell on them. You don't let it have
any of your energy or any of your time or any of your space. Johnny Cash.


# Chapter 31

Chapter 14, Jean-Philippe Bouchot.
Jean-Philippe Bouchot is a French physicist.
He is the founder and chairman of Capital Fund Management,
CFM, and is a professor of physics at École Polytechnique.
Michael.
I want you to elaborate on your physics background,
but bring that into this framework of classical economics.
Classical economics, the rationality of economic agents,
the supposed rationality, the invisible hand,
market efficiency. But for some reason, the idea of empirical data
often gets left out of the equation.
And I've seen this with some other traders that have had success.
A physics background is different.
It allows you to maybe look at the world through a wider lens.
Jean-Philippe.
Yes, exactly. I'm surprised that you say all of this
because that's more or less what my usual message is,
and you've captured all of it in a few words.
Yes, it is true that I'm a physicist by training,
and physics is, of course, learning through doing experiments.
And you learn that theories are no good
if they're not able to reproduce observations.
And even if your theory is beautiful,
if it doesn't fit, it doesn't fit.
You just have to throw it in the dustbin and start again.
As a physicist approaching economics and finance back in the early 90s,
that's what struck me most,
that it is a lack of statistical aspect
to the way economics and finance theories are built,
very much axiomatic in imagining how the world could be or should be,
then developing the theories without much care about what's going on out there.
I guess that for a while it was justified
because data was not so easy to access,
so the whole academic world has developed without data, in a sense.
And so people had to maybe supplement the lack of data
by actions and by ways of thinking.
That can happen too in physics, actually,
so perhaps I was fortunate enough
to enter the field when data became very easy to access,
and when looking at data and trying to make sense of data
through a kind of vivid light on the failures
and drawbacks of efficient market theory
and Gaussian statistics, Black Scholes,
all of this to me was quite apparent,
that it was not enough to understand the world.
Michael, you mentioned the Black Scholes model.
It's still in use.
So even though that systematic underestimation of risk
is well known by people like yourself,
it's still in use.
Jean-Philippe.
Yes, I know.
I've been ranting about that for ages,
and one problem is students.
You have to teach students something,
and Black Scholes is so easy to teach
and it's so beautiful mathematically
that a lot of people just resent the idea
of having to put it all down and start again with something more messy.
Of course the world is messy,
and being messy isn't much harder to teach
to focus on the right things.
By definition you have to form your intuition
on something else than mathematics.
That's why physics is good at that,
because it gives you a lot of examples
where you can put your hand in the dirt
and try to push on some button and see what happens.
But the same should be more and more true
with economics and finance now,
through two channels.
One is the availability of data
and the possibility to make experiments on data,
simulations, that is,
and even without data you can do simulations.
You can invent worlds of people
trading according to some rule,
or funds producing according to some rules,
and implement whatever rule of thumb
or feature of the world that you think should be there,
and then just run the simulation and see what happens.
Then what's very striking when you do that,
perhaps it's fun because you kind of play God,
and second very quickly you realize
that some of the rules just don't work.
They don't represent at all what is seen out there,
and others seem to capture something
that's very close to reality.
So my impression is that by training people
more and more with this type of background,
this type of experimental background,
experimenting with simulation is a strange notion,
which even in physics it took a little time
for people to accept that simulation
was a legitimate way to do science.
I don't know if you know Mark Buchanan,
he's a science writer,
and he wrote a few years back something I like a lot.
Just after the crisis in October 2008,
he said the following,
"...done properly computer simulation
represents a kind of telescope for the mind,
multiplying human powers of analysis and insight
just as a telescope does our powers of vision.
With simulations we can discover relationships
that the unaided human mind,
or even the human mind aided with the best
mathematical analysis, would never grasp.
For me, this is the essence
of what the physics way of doing things
has brought to the game."
Michael.
So, people don't think that you're giving
an interesting marketing story about a physics background
for your trading firm?
Your firm does not hire traders?
Jean-Philippe.
Yes, it only hires physicists.
And okay, people can think that.
But we've been saying the exact same thing
since the mid-90s.
The everyday life of CFM is driven by data.
It's banging our heads against data
and trying to make sense of what we see
and make models inspired by what we see.
Another reason that it's not pure marketing
is we're very strange as a trading firm
to have published something like
one hundred science papers in the last twenty years,
all published in academic journals,
which shows that it's really in our DNA
to consider science as the right way to do things.
Michael.
Let's jump right into my primary reason
for reaching out to you,
which was seeing your paper,
Two Centuries of Transfollowing,
see Chapter 20,
which really didn't have any big fanfare.
Just all of a sudden, it appeared in the Internet ether.
I wonder if you might lay out a scenario
for how that paper came to be
and then we can discuss the specifics inside.
Jean-Philippe.
This particular paper was in the back of our minds
for a long time.
There are two reasons for it to appear right now.
One may fall in what you call marketing,
which is that we're launching
a fund called Institutional Systematic Diversified.
And part of that fund is based on long-term
trend-following.
So it is true that we needed to give some support
to why we're doing that.
The second thing is that we recently,
in the course of the very last few years,
have had access to much longer time periods
than we had in the past.
We've been able to go back to the beginning
of the nineteenth century on commodities
and indices in terms of data.
This allowed us to back-test
quite a number of ideas
and in particular trend-following.
To our surprise, we realized
that the strategy has been extremely consistent
as long as we could go back in the past.
This seemed to us to be a very interesting finding
in the year where the Nobel Prize
was given to Fama, Schiller, and Hansen.
But this debate on the efficient market theory,
on which I've been pretty vocal myself
in the past ten years,
it is ironic that it's given to Fama,
who is still arguing there's no bubbles,
there's no crashes,
that the market went down in 2008
in anticipation of the crisis
and not the other way around,
and that everything is perfect.
Trend-following, momentum in general,
is something that efficient market theorists
have a real difficulty to explain
because that's completely out of the framework.
It's very hard to evoke some kind of risk premium
that would be associated with trend-following.
So it has to mean that markets are not that efficient.
There's a lot of other clear discrepancies
between theories and reality,
but this one is a very genuine
and clear one which talks to everybody.
Just looking at the trend on a long time scale
is giving information on the future
motion of the market.
It really means that all public information
is not included in the price right now.
For me, it's both an intellectual
and commercial point of view,
a very interesting finding.
Michael, that statement that jumped out to me was,
and this is from your paper,
the existence of trends is one of the most
statistically significant anomalies
in financial markets.
That's a powerful statement.
Jean-Philippe.
We've been looking at financial markets
in the last 20 years,
and it's very hard to find
extremely significant statistical effects.
You can find them on the high-frequency side,
but then there's a lot of murky things
around high frequency.
First of all, costs are tremendous
if you want to trade at high frequency.
It's not clear that all the high-frequency
anomalies that have a strong statistical
signature are, as economists would say,
very relevant from an economics point of view.
On the other hand, these are very slow trends
where a lot of money can pile in
and has piled in is, of course,
much more mind-boggling in a way
and also has to be taken into account
both for academics,
but also from the point of view of professionals.
Michael.
Other interesting facts in the paper,
perhaps this is obvious,
if data is going back to the early 1800s,
but trend predates trend following,
which I thought was interesting.
It's actually a very small percentage
of traders employing trend following models
that make up the volume.
Jean-Philippe.
Yes, I agree.
Well, you can see it both ways.
I would say that traders on aggregate
using trends is probably the reason
why trends are there in the first place
and people using trends have been
around for 200 years.
That's my interpretation of what we see.
There's a lot of people, even small people,
who on aggregate play the role of trend followers
and therefore create these trends.
Michael.
You mentioned Fama and the Split Nobel Prize.
I had a chance to speak with Harry Markowitz recently,
who's very lucid, 89 years young now,
and the point that I made,
Harry, did you find it interesting
that when you wrote back in the 1950s,
this is what we should be doing,
that within a few decades other academics
had taken what you said we should be doing
and had said this is what we are doing?
His response was,
I think you're going to have to talk
to the behavioral economists about that.
He didn't want to touch it,
but his point is that I never said
this is what it is.
This is what we should be doing.
Other people interpreted him
to come up with these, as you might say,
hard axioms that became rules,
the foundation of the efficient market theory.
Jean-Philippe.
Yes, it is a strange field in the sense
there's clearly interaction
between what people do and what people observe,
and the use of black shoals in 1987
is a rather vivid example of how things
can go wrong when wrong models are used.
That's what makes the subject
fascinating for a physicist,
because you have to go kind of one step further
and try to understand how the models themselves
might change the game.
Actually, we came up with a simple model
on how trend could lead to trend
or mean reversion could lead to mean reversion.
It's not clear that we could imagine
a world where people would follow mean reversion
rather than trends,
but it seems that humans have such
a propensity to follow trends.
There's a lot of very interesting
psychological experiments where you can show
that when a small child sees
three points aligning in a line,
it gives him pleasure.
We're wired to extrapolate past trends,
and that's probably a way to extrapolate
the motion of a tiger jumping on us
or something that makes us alive today.
My intuition is that it's much harder
to go against the trend
than it is to follow the trend.
Again, there's a lot of very interesting
psychological and even biological experiments
showing there's a lot of things, for instance,
hormones going in and out of our body
in the two situations.
One when we're conforming to the crowd,
and the other when we're not conforming
to the crowd.
There's a pain associated with not conforming
to what's going on.
Michael.
Classical economics has no framework
through which to understand wild markets,
and wild is your phrasing,
because you talk to the idea of classical
economics not having the ability
to have a framework to see those wild markets,
to see through them,
and when you use the word wild,
what does that mean to you?
Jean-Philippe.
Yes, you're referring to a paper that I wrote
in Nature, which was just
after the unraveling of the crisis,
and this made me react very strongly
because I felt that this was in the cards,
and, of course, other people
had seen it coming, but I was not too happy
with the way economists had been
dismissing all the attempts to introduce
a little more wildness in the description
of economic systems and financial markets.
Actually, wild is the reference
to Benoit Mandelbrot.
Mandelbrot introduced fractals, of course.
He's introduced also the idea
of distributions without the second movement,
without variance or infinite variance,
and distribution with infinite means.
That's his classification
of randomness, if you want.
He would call benign randomness
the ones that the economists love,
Gaussian and things, where you can
replace a heterogeneous system with its average.
We know, for example, that this
relates to Piketty's book,
Capital in the Twenty-First Century,
as well as that the distribution
of anything in economics is so broadly
distributed that very often it just
doesn't make sense at all to replace
a collection of people by an average
people, or a representative
agent would be the classical word.
But, coming back to Mandelbrot,
benign randomness is the one
that I just described, whereas
wild randomness is the one that is
difficult to tame, and it's difficult to tame
because it's hard to speak about
averages and variances.
That's really what I was referring to
when using the word wild.
Now, why is economics in general not able
to capture these big swings?
It's very strange. It's because
the models are constructed to be intrinsically
stable. It's like people insist
on the fact that a rational world is
a stable world, and so your models
should be stable. So,
models in economics came up with
equilibrium points which are intrinsically
stable. That is, if you perturb
them by a small amount, they're going
to naturally go back to the equilibrium.
This is so much ingrained in
a model that it's by definition
impossible to have a crisis.
What's interesting is when you remove a few
of these rational assumptions and introduce
market imperfections, then
it's easy to find situations where
the rational equilibrium of economics,
even if it still exists,
is actually unstable, and if
it's deterred by small external shocks
in such a way, the system goes out
of whack for a while. This is what
we would call a crisis.
Mathematical analysis is there
to allow us to not only describe
but anticipate to some extent,
or at least make space for, crisis
in the economic world.
And to me, this is a fascinating topic
of research on which we've been focusing
in the last few years.
Michael. You sound like you're having
fun with this subject. You get to wake
up every day and have fun.
Jean-Philippe. Yes, exactly.
That's totally true, and I'm
happy you say that.
Michael. What I have loved over the years
talking to you today and many of your peers
is that when one accepts uncertainty,
there's a certain honesty to it.
I feel a lot of discomfort
when people are so certain about what's
going to happen. Jean-Philippe.
I think that's the big difference
between physicists and economists,
and there's a lot to be written about this.
In a sense, I would say that
we're privileged as physicists
because we don't have to talk to politicians
and we don't have to make statements
about how the world is supposed to work
in the sense that nobody's relying
on us to make political decisions.
I think there's a huge amount of pressure
on economists because they're under the spotlight.
They have to come up with stories
and decisions, and this means that
it's very hard for them to take a step back and say,
okay, I'm really going to
try to understand what's going on here,
and maybe it's going to take me 10 years
or 20 years, but at the end of the day
we'll have a better theory for the world.
Okay, well, all this is great,
but what am I going to say to my
Minister of Finance when he asks me,
should I raise tax, or should I do
this or that? It's true
that it puts people in a bad situation
because they can't think long-term, and
as you've just said, as physicists by training,
what we love is to be able to think
that we understand something.
If we fail, well, it's okay.
There's nothing wrong in failing.
We know that physics has had
so many revolutions and so many things
that people were absolutely convinced were true,
turned out wrong in the end.
It's an incredibly good
backside against what you've said earlier,
against certainty, and some
form of arrogance as well.
Michael, to a degree
you're expecting failure, and maybe
the economists, they can't acknowledge
there might be failure.
Jean-Philippe. Yes, because
their theory's construction is completely
different for sociological reasons as well.
Michael, I appreciate
you taking the time.
Jean-Philippe. Very
happy to meet you someday. Of course,
we like your book, Turtle Trader.
As you saw, it's actually referenced in our paper,
and I'm very happy to have been able to talk to you.


# Chapter 32

These are the side-margin quotations for Chapter 14.
Skeptical scrutiny is the means in both science and religion, by which deep thoughts can be
winnowed from deep nonsense.
Carl Sagan.
This is a fundamental truth about any sort of practice.
If you never push yourself beyond your comfort zone, you will never improve.
Anders Ericsson.
We're rarely rational when we vote because we're rarely rational, period.
Robert M. Sapolsky.
When it comes to money, the best investments were probably the ones I did not make.
Mark Faber.
It's a wonderful thing to be optimistic.
It keeps you healthy and it keeps you resilient.
Daniel Kahneman.
Men, it has been well said, think in herds.
It will be seen that they go mad in herds, while they only recover their senses slowly,
one by one.
Charles McKay.
Extraordinary popular delusions and the madness of crowds.
Here is written in mathematical language.
Galileo Galilei.
1564-1642.
Italian physicist.
Mathematics is the science of what is clear by itself.
Carl Gustav Jakob Jakoby.
1804-1851.
German mathematician.
Mathematics knows no races or geographic boundaries.
For mathematics, the cultural world is one country.
David Hilbert.
1862-1943.
German mathematician.


# Chapter 33

Chapter 15. Ewan Kirk Ewan Kirk is the CEO and co-founder of
Cantab Capital Partners, a systematic hedge fund based in Cambridge, England. Kirk was
previously partner in charge of Goldman Sachs's Quantitative Strategies Group in Europe. His
group was responsible for all of Goldman Sachs's quantitative technology across commodities,
currencies, interest rates, credit, and equities.
Michael. A guy with a Ph.D. in Mathematical Physics going to Goldman Sachs. You weren't
the guy that was living and breathing trading when you got there, were you? Ewan.
No, not at all, no. When I turned up for my first interview with Goldman Sachs in 1992,
I didn't actually know who Goldman Sachs were. I thought they were a bank, but apart from that,
I wasn't entirely sure. So, no, I didn't live or breathe trading, I didn't even live or breathe
quantitative finance. Michael. They were looking for a certain type of thinker, a certain type of
thinking. Ewan. Yes, they were looking for somebody who had some sort of mathematical background,
and computer programming was also important. I say this to just about everybody that we interview,
that it's sort of useless being a mathematician, being a statistician, without being able to
computer program. It's like being a novelist who can't write. The way that you express your
views or express your ideas is through programming computers, and so I was a reasonably good
computer programmer. I had a background in quant, and Goldman very kindly took a punt on me. Michael.
I saw that your co-founder called programming today's literacy. You have to have it. Ewan.
It's today's literacy, and that strand runs through a lot of my career, but also runs
through what we do at Cantab trading programs. I myself have just spent the last two or three
weeks programming up a piece of our infrastructure. There's no rest for the wicked, as they say.
Michael. It's going to look to the reader that there's this perfect physics mathematical
background, but you're also a guy that allowed yourself to turn up at a black-tie dinner wearing
a kilt. Ewan. Yes, that's true. Laughter. Michael. You're not a cavalier guy. Obviously,
you're very grounded, you think in terms of risk, but what was your thinking there? What
was your thought process that you allow yourself to stand out like that? Ewan. The truth is,
of course, that for anybody who like myself originally came from Scotland, the traditional
black-tie dress is a kilt, and all of the attendant bits and pieces with that. It's
not like I turned up in a clown costume. Michael. I hope you did not infer that's
what I was saying. Ewan. No, no, I'm smiling as I'm saying this. I do think that one
thing that Goldman Sachs was very good at doing, and presumably still is, is its tolerant
to some degree of idiosyncrasy. Certainly in the early days Goldman was a partnership with
maybe one hundred fifty partners running their small businesses. That made it very much
a meritocracy, very much a what have you done for me today kind of thing. Me turning
up at a kilt is not the strangest thing that I've seen, but it's a place where
really much more so than other banks, certainly in the nineties. It is a place
where all Goldman was interested in. Were you good at your job? Within certain limits,
obviously, turning up in a clown costume at a client meeting would probably be a very quick
way to getting fired. Michael. I took it as you saying, I'm going to march to some
music that is standard, but I'm going to think outside the box. I'm not going
to just be the guy that's clocking in. Ewan. I probably couldn't violently disagree
with that view. I think, yes, there's certainly some of that in me to not just be
the guy, although to put this in context, to take that as an example, Goldman Sachs
is a very serious, very successful US corporate, and there's a limit to how outside
the box you can think at a bank, and quite rightly, too. Banks are responsible
for a lot of risk for their customers. They have a fiduciary duty in lots of
cases. Yes, you can be a little bit idiosyncratic at times, but at the end
of the day, it is a big US corporate. Michael. When I look at the success of
the London CTAs, trend followers, the London Quans, many trend following
backgrounds, why did the switch happen? Why did London become the spot? For
example, so many of the long-standing, early pioneer trend following CTAs
were from the US. What was the switch flip? Ewan. That's a good question.
That's not one I immediately have an answer for, but I can speculate. If you
think about the very early trend following, the history of the industry
is, the very early trend following, the turtles. We're talking mid-80s
there, maybe early 90s. The kickoff for the London, or maybe better
call it the European scene, probably happened in the mid to late 90s
with AHL, obviously the granddaddy of us all, and then Winton, Blue Trend,
an aspect, and ourselves, and a whole plethora of really great firms in
Europe. Partly the reason why we maybe managed to become more successful
or grow was more the scientific approach to investment and statistics. I
look back at some of these things that I see in the old tattered books
about average true range and breakouts, and it seems like the dark
ages. We are thinking in a much more statistical sense, much more
scientific, and it's not just enough that it happens to work. Maybe
we can thank David Harding and the rest of the team at AHL for building
that into the consciousness, and then it just takes off. The question
there, why didn't the CTAs in the U.S. follow that lead? I clearly
believe that there should be a more scientific approach to investing,
a rigorous statistical approach to it. I clearly believe that that's
better than just a rule that happens to have worked in the past. It's
not clear to me why that would then not be transplanted back. I
remember, even though we started in 2006-2007, I do remember people
asking me, again, particularly in the States, why do you wait your
positions by risk? Why don't you just take a constant lot quantity?
One lot of this, or ten lots of this, and ten lots of that, and ten
lots of the next thing? That's just madness in a world where you
have a contract like the wheat contract, which is maybe, I don't
know, $20,000, and the nickel contract, which is $250,000. It's
just an insane way of doing it. But it was the tradition, and our
industry is quite conservative. There's a small subset of investors
who want the new thing, believe maybe that there's some fabulous
technique out there that's just going to predict what the S&P is
going to be tomorrow, but there are also people who wanted to
be the way it was, and anything that steps outside that is maybe a
little bit different. Michael, you're talking to clients and you
have to tell the new client, or this could be a very experienced
client, perhaps not experienced with your strategy yet, and you
ultimately have to bring up the conversation of, look, losses are
statistically inevitable, you can't get around that fact. There's
still a significant number of people in the population, whether
they're very astute about investing or not so astute, they
still don't want to imagine losses as part of the game.
Ewan. Yes, people are desperate to invest in something which
never loses money, and that is, of course, why Bernie Madoff
existed. There's a great phrase by John Maynard Keys where he
said, In the field filled with fraud and deception, the man
creates his own supply. Everyone is desperate to invest in
something that doesn't lose money. I'd like to invest in
things that don't lose money. I'd like to come up with a
strategy that never loses money. Of course, we all want
that. But the reality of almost all investing, if you're
really good, really lucky, you've got a very long track
record, maybe twenty, thirty years, and you've never changed
your strategy over that period, which of course none of these
things are really true for anybody, then maybe the best
you can look for is a sharp ratio of .8, .9, maybe one.
I know there are some more liquid, say, stat-ob
strategies, which can outperform that for a long
period of time, and there, of course, August 2007
happens. But broadly, a good investment strategy, an
outstanding investment strategy, is something which
over a long period of time has a sharp ratio of
one. Investors should really want that. So at 20%
volatility with an average 20% return, that would be
great. But a 20% volatility every two years is going
to have a drawdown of 15% statistically. Every four
years, it's going to have a drawdown of 20%. This is
just what happens. Even if the system truly has that
return profile, it's going to experience those kinds
of drawdowns, and it's going to experience losses. I
have a little spreadsheet that I sometimes show to
clients when I'm discussing this, which, broadly, we
don't really use spreadsheets, but it's a nice
little tool, which simulates five years of
returns, daily returns, from something which is a
20% return, 20% volatility process. Effectively, a
Monte Carlo simulation, if you want to call it
that. And every time you press F9 on this
spreadsheet, it draws another graph of another
realization of this random but positive process.
You don't have to press F9 very often before
you get a history which loses money in a straight
line for five years, which is a 40% drawdown.
Remember, this is something which is guaranteed
to make 20% per annum over a long enough period.
The expectation of losses is something that
everyone should build into their investment
process at all times, and it's something that
investors do. The majority of our investors are
institutions. Their pension funds, their insurance
companies, their sovereign wealth funds, their
endowments. To be very fair to these investors,
they are really quite sophisticated, and they
understand that. Sometimes, when you're speaking
to maybe high net worth individuals or smaller
family offices, the desire there to protect
capital is much stronger. You have to be extremely
clear about the fact that there are things
that will happen in the future which will be
unpleasant. The other thing you have to do is
explain to investors when you're making money
that it probably won't last.
Michael. Do you see the demand for that
discretionary macro trader or hedge fund that
says, Trust me, I have the experience, I can
call the direction. I can position these
multiple futures contracts across all these
different markets. Just trust my discretion.
Do you see demand for that waning? Ewan.
Obviously, by the time somebody's sitting
on the other side of a table from me,
they're probably not going to be asking that
question, and I am of course very clear
about the fact, and particularly when
people say, Do you take risk off? Do you
put it on? How about taking off your bond
position or adding more this? I'm very
clear about the fact I cannot see into
the future. I'm not psychic, so therefore
I don't have any skill in that. My skills
lie elsewhere. Maybe nobody has skills
like that. Maybe it is just impossible.
I could certainly argue both sides of that.
The demand for discretionary trading
probably comes from the reactive demand.
It's extremely hard to write a model.
Well, it's impossible to write a model
that can react to every last move in
the market or react to a piece of
information that's coming in. September 11th
is probably a very good example of a
piece of information that arrived,
the world changed at two minutes past nine,
and systematic models knew nothing about it.
Whereas discretionary traders clearly did.
In those kinds of events, it's quite
possible that discretionary traders will
outperform, and I can understand why
people have that demand for it.
But it is an extremely difficult job
to be a good macro trader.
We all know of those people who have
great reputations in doing that.
It's maybe only a handful of people.
Of course, the interesting thing about
macro trading is that everyone
wants to be a macro trader.
It's really interesting when you hear
stock price pickers talk discretionary
equity long-short, people talk.
Very often what they're talking
about is macro things.
We think the market's going up,
we think it's going down.
We're doing this, and then therefore,
we're going to buy these stocks.
And quite often, macro decisions
are wrapped up in security analysis,
which they probably shouldn't be.
I really think trading on a
macro discretionary basis is one of
the world's hardest jobs, and it's
possible the people who are successful
at it may just be the lucky pennies.
I don't know.
I don't have hugely strong views on this,
but it is a very hard job.
Michael, when the macro discretionary
guys hear that everything you do
is systematic from strategy selection,
asset allocation, portfolio
construction, position sizing,
execution, and risk control,
that's got to cause some people to go,
what the blank?
That's got to be that a-ha moment
of, this is an approach that's different.
Ewan, I don't think we're exceptional.
Obviously, whilst I know my peers well
socially, I don't know what they do
and how they sell themselves.
But I would be surprised if any
of the large European CTAs are talking
about how they intervene in what they do,
to make discretionary decisions.
There is that little bit from people
who say, we have a model,
but we occasionally intervene.
My opinion, that's not systematic trading.
In systematic trading,
I've used this phrasing before,
it's almost like being pregnant.
You either are or you aren't.
You can't just be a little bit systematic.
I often say to people who are
maybe pitching me with systems
that are a model that they then
put a discretionary label on,
why don't you just run two books,
run the model in one book
and run your discretionary overlay
as another book,
and then just see which one makes money.
This is a way for people to hide
really quite complex decisions.
Remember, what we're all trying to do
is we're trying to say,
what's more likely to go up tomorrow
and what's more likely to go down tomorrow?
And that's the decision.
Now, what we have,
and many other people like us,
is we have lots of complex
or sometimes simple models
which have been tested statistically
over many, many years.
And then they're weighted
using very sophisticated
weighting algorithms
and costs control measures
and all of those other things,
literally millions of lines
of code running.
And all we're trying to do
is forecast whether or not
something's going to go up
or down tomorrow.
Very often people intervene
in their models
by saying things like,
vol is going to come off tomorrow
or correlations are going to go up
or I don't think this model
is going to work as well tomorrow.
That's a very complex statement.
The amount of analysis
you would have to do to say,
for example,
a trend following model
isn't working very well,
is unlikely to work tomorrow.
The idea that you can do that
for something as complex
as a model
which is running on 120 different assets
with risk weighting
and cost control measures
on top of it
seems to me to be unlikely.
Michael,
why don't you talk about
part of your process
under the hood?
In the sense that you like
the idea of proving
a strategy is broken
rather than it's right.
Ewan.
Yes, I don't think
I'm the first person
to come up with that,
in that effectively
that is the scientific method
which has been working
pretty well for humans
since the Greeks came up with it.
Science is about
proving things wrong.
It's not about
proving things right.
What you're trying to do
is break your strategy.
You can never really prove
that a strategy works
or doesn't work.
Finance,
despite pundits
and newspapers
and people in the television
and maybe even people on podcasts,
filling what they say
with certainty,
this is going to happen,
this is the best way
of doing things,
our systems are better
than somebody else's systems,
our stock portfolio
is better than somebody else,
I know this,
I know that.
Finance is full of that,
but in fact finance
is dominated by randomness.
Randomness is everything.
And so because randomness
is everything,
you need to be uncertain.
You need to have a lack
of conviction
and dogma in certain things
because you want to be able
to prove that things are wrong.
When we come up
with a new strategy
or a new idea
or a new trading system,
what we're trying to do is,
at least when we're simulating it
and running it
through all the systems,
what we're trying to do
is find out what's wrong with it.
And then if you get
what is literally months
of testing
and retesting
and rethinking about it
and thinking about things,
different environments
and so on,
if it gets through months of that,
then maybe
it's going to work
in the future.
These are all very weak,
uncertain statements,
but to a great extent,
our philosophy
of what we do
is around that uncertainty
and lack of conviction.
There are certain things
I've got conviction about.
Obviously,
I've got conviction
about the importance
of technology.
I've got conviction
about the importance
of risk-weighting
or coherent portfolio design.
All of those things
I've got a lot of
conviction about,
but I don't have conviction
about any particular technique.
You just do
what you think is best
and what you think
will be persistent.
Michael.
It seems like
until the last handful
of years in the fund
management arena,
so many people desire certainty,
and thus it's refreshing
to hear,
I don't know.
I'm doing the best I can,
but I don't know,
and I really don't
think anyone else knows.
Ewan.
What we are trying
to do as scientists
in finance is a little bit
like sort of dimly
being able to forecast
what the weather is
going to be like tomorrow.
It's like meteorology
in that sense.
It's full of uncertainty
and technology helps,
and the models
aren't perfect,
and even the biggest computers
in the world
don't forecast the weather
very well five days forward.
But meteorologists
are trying hard to improve that,
both in the technology side
and better theories
about atmospheric circulation.
And there may be not
too bad at forecasting
the weather tomorrow
in certain places,
probably not in the UK
because it's so rainy.
In the past,
a lot of investment
has really been people
looking at the sky
and saying,
look at that cloud,
it looks like a dog.
That probably captures
the realism of the world.
The other way of thinking
about this is very often
and rightly,
when something happens,
either when you make money
or lose money,
or when a model does something
or whatever it might be,
there's always the question
that everyone asks,
whether or not
it's internally people
that can't have
or our investors
or journalists.
Why did this happen?
It's a great question.
Why did this happen?
What we try and do
is approach the problem
from the perspective
of the reason why
this happened was chance.
Now prove that it wasn't chance.
Very often that's quite hard.
You have a bad month
or you have a great month.
People say,
what happened?
Can we prove that it's
any different from chance?
Quite often the answer
to that question is no.
It's just a different mindset.
Obviously,
you have to approach problems
in lots of different ways,
but approaching a problem
from the mindset of,
this might just be a result
of random noise.
Let's see if we can prove
that it isn't.
Is intellectually satisfying
if nothing else.
It's quite a powerful technique.
Michael,
I saw this great article
about you
featured in the New York Times
and I went through some comments
and I noticed
some were highly negative.
The thrust of the comments
were that you don't
bring value to the economy.
And I thought to myself,
because I know something
about what you do
and what your peers do.
Those comments misunderstand.
Many of your investors,
even if they're institutional investors,
are representing the small guy.
It's the small guy's retirement money
that often makes it
into the big institutional account.
Maybe people don't see that,
yes, you might not be accepting
Ma and Pa's retail account.
That's not your position.
But I think someone
misses the point
and misses the boat
when they make that criticism.
What's your feeling on that?
Ewen,
this is a hard question to answer.
The question is,
are we doing something
that is socially useful?
Are we doing a good thing
for the economy?
Once you start going down that route,
what is useful to the economy
or useful to society?
The world only needs
one car manufacturer.
It doesn't need
hundreds of car manufacturers.
It doesn't need
hundreds of models.
Every car manufacturer
is kind of not doing
something useful
for the economy.
Nobody really needs
an expensive meal
at an expensive restaurant.
So expensive meals
and expensive restaurants
aren't really doing
anything useful to the economy.
Nobody needs podcasts.
We can live without them.
Once you get into that,
then you're getting
into some dangerous water.
We are, I believe,
over time
or providing something
which is valuable
to our investors.
We are doing that
as well as we can.
We're constantly trying
to add little incremental
improvements
that make the returns better.
We won't make money
every month
and we won't make money
every year
and sometimes we lose money
and sometimes we make money.
But we are doing the best
we can to produce
positive returns for investors.
And our investors are,
as you say,
a wide variety of people.
Their pension funds,
its mom and dad,
as we say here in the UK,
who are investing in this.
And although this is not
quite the same
as finding a cure for cancer,
it's certainly not the same
as landing a probe
on a comet,
which are fantastic
things to do.
This is what we do.
We probably at the margin,
make the returns
of our investors' portfolios
better in some way,
either higher or lower risk
or less correlated
and so on.
Where I think
there's much more of a problem
is with people doing
something not socially useful,
like when relatively
simple strategies
are dressed up
as something very complex.
People effectively
just being an index tracker,
doing long only things,
like just tracking
the S&P index
but charging 2 and 20 for it.
That's a very bad thing to do.
At least I believe
that what we do is something
that is intellectually rigorous.
It's probably a good thing.
The other thing to remember,
of course,
is that trend following,
systematic trading,
the money comes from somewhere.
If we make money for investors,
somebody loses it.
Michael.
If you lose it,
someone's gaining it.
Ewan.
Someone's gaining it.
We would believe and hope
that over time
we will make money
more often than lose.
We will over time
get positive returns,
but it does mean
that somebody is losing.
It's a very hard question to answer.
Michael.
There's a game out there
that everybody can play,
everybody can pony up to the table,
develop a strategy,
and it is the ultimate game
where everyone can try.
I look at it like,
if you don't like it,
go try.
Ultimately, the libertarian in me
says we've got a lot of
better things to do on this planet
than draw those types of conclusions,
and perhaps if you look closely
you can see those positive things.
But, of course, we all know
that some people will never
see all positive things.
You can't convince everybody.
Ewan.
That's probably true.
I'm obviously always wary
about talking about politics
in any public forum
because it's not my job to do that.
But I do believe
that we do a relatively good thing.
If nothing else,
I provide employment
for fifty people in Cambridge,
which is the small business side
of what we do as well.
It's important to remember
that this little community
we have as an employer,
and it pays people money
and does all these things as well.
I do believe that we run
good small businesses,
and that is a good thing.
One of the things
that I am very pleased about
is that in 2006
I reckon I sat in a small office
with two computers
and a server that gave us
electric shocks
every time we touched it,
and from that
we have built a business.
It's a small business,
and it's a business
like any small business
that can go through bad times
and could potentially go bust.
And all the efforts
associated with running small,
medium-sized enterprises
means we've managed to survive
for eight or nine years now,
and I'm really pleased about that.
If I'm proud of anything,
I'm proud of that.
Michael.
That's inspirational.
I'd love for you to expand
on the idea that
you like to ask clients
what they like,
not necessarily force
things on clients,
if you could expand on that,
because clearly
some clients are not going to
have the technical market
know-how that you do.
So there's going to be
some desire for guidance.
Could you expand
on seeking client feedback?
Ewan.
That's maybe taking it
a little bit out of context.
It is important to understand
what your client's
utility function is,
to use that scientific phrase.
What are they looking for?
What do they expect
from an investment?
That's what informs
the way that you
explain things to them.
As you say, generally,
although all of our clients
are very knowledgeable
and sophisticated
in lots of different areas,
and of course,
they have to cover
all types of investments
and all types of asset allocation,
they're almost certainly
less knowledgeable than us
in the very area that we do,
systematic macro-trading
or systematic micro-trading.
The point here is
that you have to understand
your client's drivers.
What is it they are looking
for in their portfolio?
What do they expect?
It isn't a question of us
sort of sitting on one side
of the table saying,
What do you want?
We've got it.
You just ask,
we'll give you that.
But understanding
what drives
the decision-making process,
who their stakeholders are,
for example,
we have two products.
We have our original
quantitative fund,
which is higher volatility,
it's 20%,
it's high octane,
it's 220 fee,
so it's very much in that mold
of high octane,
very diversified,
systematic macro-
and micro-trading.
We also have another product,
which is lower volatility,
it's 10% volatility,
it's much more scalable,
it's got more basic trend
and more basic value
strategies in there,
and it's available to investors
at a half and ten.
Now, understanding
your investor means
that you can understand
what their internal desires are.
What do they need?
Maybe they want low-cost,
very functional,
but they want a low-cost system
where it's lower volatility
and the headline numbers are smaller.
We all know that investing
in a 20% volatility product
is too risky.
Then all you have to do
is invest half your money
in the 20% volatility product
and keep half of it
in your pocket
and you've got a 10% volatility investment.
But somehow that doesn't feel
the same as a 10% volatility product
for reasons that I really don't get.
The pure mathematician in me
says that's nuts.
But nonetheless it is true
and I'm human too,
obviously,
and I feel that.
It is important to understand
your investor,
who their stakeholders are,
and by understanding that
and communicating with investors
at the right level.
None of our investors need to know
or cares about the deep statistical details
which might be embedded
in some nonlinear
Bayesian regression portfolio algorithm.
That sounds great,
but they kind of don't care
and they shouldn't care about that.
But they should care about things
like culture, technology,
people, the search processes,
and these are all things
that we can explain
and we want to explain
in great detail.
And if you can understand
what your investor needs and wants,
then maybe you can explain
those things better.
I always feel
that I'm not really in that camp of,
and our industry is quite bad at this,
if I told you about my models,
I'd have to shoot you.
That's quite common,
that sort of,
I have to be massively secret,
I can't tell you about a thing.
That's wrong.
We as an investor
are managing money for people
and it's their money
and they have the right to know
and we have the obligation
to tell them what it is
we're doing with it.
Michael, that probably has been
one of the reasons
that you guys have gone
from zero to significant
in fairly short order.
In a very competitive space.
Ewan, yes, well, we have.
I'll refer you
to my previous explanation
about randomness.
Yes, some of that is,
of course, luck.
We had a good run.
We didn't have such a good year
last year.
We're having a good year this year.
Some of this is randomness,
but apart from being open
and transparent
and supporting investors
and all these things
that you have to be,
the other strand
that runs through everything we do
is that sort of aggregation
of marginal improvements.
Little, small, marginal improvements
that really in and of themselves
maybe just don't make
much of a difference.
Let's say we work out
some way of saving ourselves
half a basis point in costs a day.
That doesn't seem like very much,
half a basis point.
That's a tiny amount of money,
but it adds up to nearly a percent
and a half over the course of a year.
That's great.
Fine, we'll have that.
And lots of those little marginal
improvements are probably
what distinguishes good funds
from less good funds.
One of the things
you have to remember in life
is that not everybody
is going to think
that you're great.
I'm quite pragmatic
about these things.
There's valid criticisms
about systematic trading.
There's valid criticisms
about the finance industry.
You've got to take
those criticisms on board,
understand why they've happened.
There's been a lot of,
as we know,
lots of stuff in the press,
bad things have happened
in finance.
People are right to criticize.
I'm not going to get annoyed
about it
because maybe
some of the criticisms
aren't bad.
We certainly don't have
any monopoly on the truth.
Michael, as somebody
who has watched
this particular space
for a long time
and going back
many, many decades,
there is something noble
about the systematic guys
that have done this
for a long time.
There is something
generally consistent
that you can hang on to
in this systematic space.
Like you said, though,
maybe things break
and it falls apart
at some point in time,
but knock on wood
for several decades or more,
it's done pretty well.
Ewan, I think people
in this systematic space
we try harder.
To use that old Avis ad,
we do try.
I know just about everyone
in the European space.
I know that everyone
is completely focused
on just doing the best they can
and that's great.
There's very few charlatans
or people that are just
knocking together
any old rubbish
just so they can raise
some assets.
People really try hard
and sometimes we fail
but on average
the industry succeeds.
Michael,
that's how it goes there, right?
It's not necessarily consistency.
It can just
come, boom,
and you all of a sudden
have a September 2014
and everyone goes,
where did that come from?
Hold on.
That's trend following.
Ewan, that's the way it works.
That's an interesting
thing for people
when people say
trend following
hasn't worked for three years.
I explain if you take
a simple trend following model
and run it across 100 assets.
When trend followings
working really well,
it's maybe working on 60 assets
and not working on 40.
And when it's not working,
it's working on 45 assets
and not working on 55 assets.
There's never really been
a period in history
where trend following
hasn't worked on something.
It just hasn't worked enough
and I've got to be careful
always to say
we're not a trend follower alone.
We do lots of other stuff.
Trends in bonds,
trends in AGs,
trends in the yen,
trends in energy.
This is all working
out really well
and we're in one of those
golden periods
where trends are working
on a lot of different things.
That too won't last.
Over time,
there'll be ups and downs.
But over a long enough
period of time,
trend following,
and more generally
systematic macro trading,
has done incredibly well
and presumably,
and this is the little scientist
in uncertainty in me coming out,
and presumably
with a reasonable degree
of probability,
it will continue to work
in the future.
Michael.
And if anyone out there
looks at a systematic
quant track record
and it's all black ink,
then you've got trouble.
Ewan.
I refer you to my previous answer
about Bernie Madoff.


# Chapter 34

These are the side margin quotations for Chapter 15.
The Federal Reserve is not currently forecasting a recession.
Ben Bernanke, January 10, 2008.
A real decision is measured by the fact that you've taken a new action.
If there's no action, you haven't truly decided.
TONY ROBBINS
In today's world, if you worry about what anybody thinks about your decisions, you're
going to drive yourself to a problem, a big problem, alcohol or something.
You just got to put your nose to the grindstone and believe in yourself, believe you're making
the right call and just go.
JOHN GRUDEN
You are not special.
You are not a beautiful or unique snowflake.
You're the same decaying organic matter as everything else.
CHUCK POLINICK
FIGHT CLUB
My approach works not by making valid predictions, but by allowing me to correct false ones.
GEORGE SORROWS
Speculative bubbles do not end like a short story, novel or play.
There is no final denouement that brings all the strands of a narrative into an impressive
final conclusion.
In the real world, we never know when this story is over.
ROBERT SHILLER
religion is a culture of faith, science is a culture of doubt.
RICHARD FEINMAN
Apparently, people do not like the truth, but I do like it.
I like it because it upsets a lot of people.
You show them enough times that their arguments are bullshit, then maybe just once, one of
them will say, oh, wait a minute, I was wrong.
I live for that happening, rare, I assure you.
Lemme.
Motorhead.
One of the things that I love to do is travel around the world and look at archeological
sites, because archeology gives us an opportunity to study past civilizations and see where
they succeeded and where they failed.
Use science to work backwards and say, well, really, what were they thinking?
NATHAN MEERVOLD
Financial crises are an unfortunate but necessary consequence of modern capitalism.
Andrew Lowe.
Many areas of modern life rely on scientific research and are guided by well-defined rules
that are applied systematically.
When flying aeroplanes or developing new medicines, we rely on physics, math, statistics, and
computer science.
Taking these disciplines and applying them to investment research is a natural step.
Ewan Kirk
We all fool ourselves from time to time in order to keep our thoughts and beliefs consistent
with what we have already done or decided.
Robert B. Cialdini.
We all think alike.
No one thinks very much.
Walter Lipman.


# Chapter 35

Chapter 16, Alex Graserman.
Alex Graserman is a member of the ISAM systematic trend investment committee.
He has worked with Larry Heit since 1989, initially as research director at Mint Investment
Management Company, Mint, responsible for research and development of trading strategies
and overall portfolio risk management.
Graserman co-authored Trend Following with Managed Futures, the search for crisis alpha.
Alex, are you still living in God knows what country?
Michael.
Oh, I love it.
Yes, well, let's just leave it at that.
That keeps the audience guessing, God knows what country.
We'll circle back to that at the end, maybe.
Let me just jump right into the heart of the matter.
When I last talked to you and Larry Heit, we were right in the middle of the weekly
parade of 26-year-old Financial Times reporters writing about Trend Following is dead.
And then something funny happened along the way to the parade.
Even in a zero interest rate environment, in a relatively low volatility
environment, all of a sudden you and your peers started to make quite a bit of
Trend Following money.
I know we don't want this to sound like an infomercial, but it's educational in
the sense that many people probably don't know the real performance
when they see all these obituaries written about Trend Following.
Well, it just hasn't worked out that way, has it?
Alex, I've been around long enough to probably have seen four or five of these
obituaries written, maybe even more over the years, and we're still here.
We've seen this in our 800-year study.
This is not some voodoo arbitrage strategy that extracts something from somewhere
that's not understood where it could just easily end.
This is a strategy that harvests natural occurrences in markets.
The only way you can, I guess, permanently kill a Trend Following strategy
is to declare all markets to go sideways forever, or to declare that no market
will ever move significantly away from some sort of equilibrium, and that just
doesn't happen for long enough periods of time.
I'm looking at the yield of the 10-year note, and all prognosticators have said
that, oh, that can't go to where it is now, and here it is.
But that's the nature of Trend Following.
Michael, look at crude oil.
There's been all kinds of fundamental opinions about why oil has to go up,
or why it's at the right price, and this and that.
And then wham-bam, thank you, ma'am.
The price dropped pretty significantly.
Alex, yes, and nobody knows where it's going to go, but
it's just the nature of people to figure, okay,
things are not going to move far away from where they are.
Yet the same people will invest most of their money in stocks and
hope that they'll go up 100%.
This is why this kind of strategy, Trend Following, adds value over time.
Michael, it's important for people to realize you're not saying that you know
what's going to happen tomorrow.
You're not saying that stocks are going to continue to go down or up.
But there's another way to think except being only long stocks.
There's something else out there.
You've been in the middle of that something else for a long time.
I would love for you to go back in time.
You work with one of the most colorful people that I've ever met.
I would like for you to talk about your first meeting, how old you were,
your background, and your first meeting with Larry Hight, and
how you guys have come to have this great career together.
Alex, yes, it was kind of a fork in the road as I look back.
You know the joke, if you get to a fork in the road, you take it.
I came to interview with Larry in 1989.
I was a kid out of school.
I didn't know anything about Trend Following and certainly not managed
futures or details, I just needed a job.
I was making 28,000 a year and Larry offered me 32,000.
I still have the offer sheet.
Michael, hold on, you say out of school you were 22,
26, grad school, undergrad?
Alex, 21, 22.
Michael, okay, young guy.
Alex, yes, didn't really know who Larry Hight was.
This was in Milburn, New Jersey, and he was one of the guys that interviewed me.
Now, the interesting thing is the Market Wizards book had either just come out or
was coming out.
I don't recall whether there was an actual book on the shelf or
a draft of the book on the shelf, but somebody gave me in the office
the chapter about Larry to read while I was waiting.
And I remember just flipping to, I'm paraphrasing Jack Schwager's question,
something like, what's your edge?
Or something like that.
As somewhat of a scientist out of school,
I would normally have expected some quite scientific answer,
because I heard that Mint did something quantitative.
So some sort of rocket science answer for what people did in 1989.
But then I read this psychology stuff about how we know what we don't know,
and I was like, you've got to be kidding me, what am I doing here?
Michael, that was a line from Larry.
Alex, yes, Larry said that his edge is that he knows what he doesn't know.
Michael, and you're reading this before you go into the interview?
Alex, yes, I'm reading this before I'm going into the interview.
The interview was, okay, whatever, go home.
But then typically you have to follow up and write a letter or email.
It was a great interview.
Tell the headhunter that I really want this job.
I couldn't figure out whether I really wanted to tell him that I wanted
this job, because actually I was confused.
Larry gave a talk in my class at Columbia recently.
I teach a class at Columbia.
He gave a talk to a bunch of grad students, and
he confused the hell out of them too.
Laughter, because it takes time to sink in.
Michael, he makes those simple statements, but
the depth of those simple statements is not to be underestimated.
Alex, yes, later on I've obviously learned what all that means.
It's the respect for risk and
not getting very emotionally attached to anyone's strategy and those kinds of
things, which allows you to survive for decades and decades in the markets.
But initially, just like recently in my class,
I have 80, 90 graduate PhD students, and here comes the Market Wizard.
And they start asking him things they think a Market Wizard should know,
like where gold is going next week, or
which way the market's going because he's some sort of a wizard.
He, of course, says he has no idea.
He just needs to know what he doesn't know, and if he gets into a trade,
and if he's wrong, then he gets out of it.
Larry's view is so powerful, but yet so simple.
To go back to my story,
really it's the fact that he offered me a couple of thousand dollars more
that I ended up taking the job.
I really had no idea, no way to appreciate that, and
no idea how to judge Mint or what Larry did, I just, I dove in.
Michael, how quickly did you know once you were hired and
you got into the office and you're around Larry,
how quickly did you know this was going to possibly be your passion for
the rest of your career?
How quickly did you start to have that feeling?
Alex, probably took a couple of years.
I saw the system was making money, but
it took a couple of years to kind of sink in what this is about.
I was like most geeks in the beginning and just trying to find the holy grail.
But it's your realization that no matter how smart you are,
I see this with all my students.
I joke that I try to bring their IQ down after they take my class rather
than go up.
Obviously, their IQs are high to begin with, but
if you have the kind of investment IQ where you think you know everything,
you'll end up failing.
It took a while to establish the right mental equilibrium.
This is, by the way, where it's hard to hire the right people in this area,
because you need a combination of two things that almost never go together,
which is very, very smart people that are also very, very humble.
To survive in this business, you need to have the right balance.
If you get too smart and not humble enough, you get too emotionally attached.
There's a lot of people out there in the world who are very humble, but
maybe not smart enough to do at least the basic arithmetic of the strategies.
It took a while for the strategy to sink in.
But I've been in this for 25 years and
have learned not to get too emotionally attached to people declaring trend
following dead.
On the other hand, you want not to feel like we're walking on water
when we're up 30% on the year.
These things come and go, but over time it works.
But I wanted to make one point about trend following that is confusing to people.
They focus too much on the S&P, obviously, because it's in everybody's
portfolios, but they think, the value of trend following is just to time
the short side of the S&P.
I have a lot of allocators who are asking me,
well, what's my position in the S&P?
If I say I'm long because trend following is long, then they say,
oh, but that's not a diversifying investment.
Why do I need trend following?
If I say I'm short, then they say, okay, maybe that's too late.
And they try to overthink this.
The value of trend following is not just getting the right side of the S&P trade.
It may or may not happen.
The truth is the systems are not that great in any one market.
The value of trend following is that we can do this over 150 markets,
or however many markets one can find, and
really have a diversified uncorrelated investment.
That's what this is about.
That's why it's worked in our book for 800 years.
If you look back at my first experience with equity markets, gosh, shucks,
it was 1987, Mint made 60% in that year.
This was before I started at Mint, so this was in the history books.
But they didn't make that from necessarily timing Black Monday.
It makes money anyhow.
Some corn trades and other things in other markets, and the same thing in 01, 02.
Same thing in 2008.
The value of trend following is not a one market thing.
It's a harvesting of natural human behavior in 150 different markets.
Michael, I see many papers about trend following in the classical sense
like you're talking about.
But in the last bunch of years, there's been a lot of papers about momentum, and
they specifically focus only on equities.
There's some confusion that comes from some of the academic work,
where it's been attempting to attach momentum only to an equity perspective,
and ignoring what you're talking about as this great diversification.
Alex, yes, so maybe this is slightly nerdy, but
there is a difference between so-called cross-sectional momentum,
which is almost what all academic papers talk about with equities.
This would be some kind of relative strength, one stock to another,
and time series momentum is what trend following is.
We trend follow any given market, whether it's going up and down,
really unrelated to other markets.
It's related in terms of correlation and how much you risk, but
not in terms of the signal.
We could have no position in all markets except for one.
All these equity papers are dealing with this cross-sectional momentum,
where you compare one stock to another, and things like that.
And they get into the efficient markets of whether it should exist,
doesn't exist.
It's over-complicating things.
When we have 800 years of data and simple, not simple strategies, but
simple concepts, you buy high and you sell higher, and
you sell short when it's going down, and you cover lower, that works.
In fact, some of the academic papers out call it time series momentum.
That's what this is.
By the way, anything in equities is invariably probably going to correlate
to equities, even if you try to make it uncorrelated to equities.
What adds value is trend following, whether it's in bonds or
commodities or emissions or iron ore, or obviously currencies.
Then people ask me, what about the interventions and
the government this and the government that?
Meanwhile, look where the bond yields are and how far they've gone.
Things can go quite far.
Michael, the subtitle of your book has the phrase Crisis Alpha.
It's clear to anybody that looks at the data during these crisis periods.
This time series, trend following, does perform exceptionally well.
There's no guarantee that things will work out that way in the future, but
it's performed that way.
But what's interesting about the last bunch of months,
we really weren't at a crisis period.
But there's still those trend following performances coming out of a fairly low
volatility, zero interest rates environment.
If somebody was to couch trend following as only crisis alpha,
also known as a black swan, that would be a mistake.
Alex.
Yes, in fact, some people in our space have tried to make some kind of an excuse
for some lackluster performance by calling this a tail hedge and saying,
there was no tail.
That's a total mistake.
Trend following has two great features that you probably can't find in
almost any other investment.
First, it's totally uncorrelated.
If you start with that and look at the history of trend following for 10 years,
20 years, or 800 years, it generates a return stream with zero to
slightly negative correlation to all other asset classes.
If we take that as given, when you have 800 years of data,
it's pretty close to a given, it's totally uncorrelated.
It also happens to be quite negatively correlated in many periods when you
want a negative correlation, which is the crisis periods.
Because it tends to make money from whether it's inflation shocks or
downturns and equities or something else going on somewhere.
Typically volatility picks up during those periods and
it makes money somewhere, but it's not only that.
You could take out all the crisis alpha periods, all the crisis periods,
and it's still a great investment.
I'd argue it's a liquid investment because we trade liquid markets and so
people will go in their 401k plan and have 5000 versions of the same thing.
Small cap, mid cap, mid cap.
I heard this term recently, smid cap, small to mid cap or large cap, and
international and this and that.
And how many versions are there of being long only?
Which are all 80% to 90% correlated.
70% correlated at least.
Of course, you get a little diversification from that, so fair enough.
But imagine in that same 401k plan or whatever list of instruments,
now there was something called XYZ.
It wasn't labeled trend following and somebody remembers,
I read something bad about trend following.
It's just another investment, another mutual fund or
another fund that somebody can put their money into.
You look at it and you say, wow, this thing is just different.
And it tends to work when other things don't.
How much closer do you get to a holy grail?
Maybe that's too strong of a statement, but
in terms of the possibilities of what one can invest in, how much better can it be?
It's totally diversifying and there's a good chance, no guarantee, but
there's a good chance that it'll perform in the periods when other things don't.
So you go back to optimization 101.
Any kind of optimization of the portfolio should tell you to have some
allocation to that thing.
In fact, we're writing a paper right now on the topic of how costly it is
not to have trend following in your portfolio.
How much do you give up by actually not having it?
Not in any particular year, but over time.
It's quite costly because you're actually avoiding a tremendously
diversifying asset class.
Michael, let me jump into the idea of benchmarking and
specifically those institutional managers out there that are fixating on stocks,
the long-term only prism.
Your firm has to deal with that.
It's a constant education process, and if you look at a situation like CalPERS,
they had a very small percentage,
relatively speaking, with perhaps managers like ISEM.
I don't know if they had an investment with ISEM or not, but
I'm just saying in general and trend following.
I wonder if you could maybe relay a story about watching people convert or
watching people not convert to this way of thinking.
Alex, we do this all day long.
We have major pension fund investors, so some people get it.
It's interesting that in some parts of the world,
maybe it's Australia, Canada, Middle East, and the part of the world that you're in,
Japan, that kind of area, historically have been diversification friendly.
It's almost a mental mindset maybe,
because the Japanese market certainly hasn't been going up in a straight line,
right?
They have a lot of currency movements, and maybe,
those parts of the world are just friendly to the concept of diversification.
Trend following will follow from there, but
you first have to have the concept of moving somebody away from 100% equities.
The US is somehow emotionally attached to this idea that everything will go up
forever.
Obviously, some institutions have allocations to this.
The CalPERS thing, by the way, probably was not a managed futures issue.
It was just the size of the hedge funds.
They actually had a decent allocation to manage futures, but
with some institutions, it depends on their appetite for embracing diversification.
And as you use the word benchmark,
whether some form of diversification is in the benchmark.
What's the benchmark of the institution?
And if the benchmark doesn't allow for this kind of diversification,
then we can talk to them until the cows come home.
They probably won't risk their career by putting it in.
Because at the end of the day,
1% allocation to trend following is not going to make any difference.
It has to be 5, 10, and we have institutions who have investments with us or
with some of our peers at that level.
But their investment committee has embraced that in terms of their benchmark, and
they just in general embrace the concept of diversification.
To some people, it's so obvious.
I can't believe that we even considered not doing it.
To some people, it's, okay, stocks go up forever, so why do I need to bother?
Michael, I think that it would take a Japanese style stock market crash,
perhaps to get some people to say, we have to change.
There's going to be some out there that as long as equities go up seemingly in
a straight line, even though there's been some 50% drawdowns in the last 15 years,
they're going to be hard to convince.
Alex, especially in the US, like no matter what,
it's just all about equities go straight up, equities go straight up.
I don't know if it'll take a Japanese type of downturn, but
some sort of shock in the system.
But again, I'm trying to tell people it's not that you just have to have that shock.
Why not have a diversifying uncorrelated investment in your portfolio
that can do well when other things don't?
You don't have to appeal to somebody's sense that, wow,
this is only going to make money if stocks go down 100%.
People try to overthink the environmental factors for trend following, and
then they try to time them.
Some people got it into their heads that this only works when volatility's high.
Well, you said a minute ago that volatility hasn't been particularly high
recently, and we've done well.
There's no law that says crude oil can't go from 100-something down to 85 or
something like that in a fairly smooth line.
You don't have to have massive volatility.
There was a stomach virus that affected lean hogs recently that made prices go
way up, and not particularly with tremendous volatility.
It was just a fundamental event.
This whole down movement and interest rates over the years hasn't been
particularly highly volatile.
Somebody said to me, this strategy only works in highly volatile environments,
so I'll wait till there's a high volatility environment.
Well, things are not that easy, laughter.
By the time you get to a high volatility environment, or it doesn't work because
you have too much intervention, well, wait a second.
Intervention has caused the biggest trend of all times in fixed income.
Michael, they want to trade your trend following strategy.
No, they want to trade you.
Alex, yes, they want to trade me.
People years ago used to want to time equity markets too, remember that?
People would try to time equity markets, get in and out,
fun timing, all this, it's not that simple.
It's not supposed to be that simple.
What you're supposed to do is have a handful of diversifying investments,
and that's what's going to take your portfolio to the promised land.
I tell people the worst thing you can do is try and time a trend follower.
To try to time it when they're doing well, I should give them more money.
And when they're doing poorly, take money away.
This is actually the worst kind of investment you can make.
Michael, you are a professor.
You have many, many PhD candidate students at Columbia.
Let's say hypothetically, because you're the top guy now or
one of the top guys now, so they come to the office.
The new employee comes to the office.
Obviously, in this day and age, they're going to know something about ISIM.
They're going to know something about you.
They're going to know something about Larry before they sit down with you.
But you have to introduce the science of trend following to that new candidate,
that new person that you want to join your team.
How do you start?
Alex, we have all these things like adaptive market hypothesis and
behavioral theory and things like that.
But at the end of the day, what I would tell people is the markets are some sort
of a risk transfer mechanism.
You cannot assume that just because you're smart,
you will suck money out of the markets.
If you think of it like a poker game, it could be a zero sum game.
You could be the best player, but
then your profits will come down not because your skill goes down,
but because the other people at the table will just leave the game.
Is it a game of zero sum kind of outsmarting people?
Or is it a natural phenomenon in the markets, almost kind of like providing insurance?
Larry talked about this in our last talk about relating trend following to
insurance.
I say there are natural occurring things in the markets.
Let's start with something other than trend following, so
we've got an analogy.
Value investing, right?
It's been scientifically, dare I say, proven or shown with data that value
investing works because a lot of investors don't want to hold those stocks when they
go down.
And you actually are in an economic rent type of risk premium if you hold them.
There are other examples in the markets where you're actually providing value to
the markets by doing certain things.
That's what makes it lasting because there's no way for 800 years you could
find some gimmick that makes money where you would only do that if nobody else
knew about it.
There's no way you can get away with it for 800 years.
Somebody from my class will figure it out and then it'll be gone.
This happens a lot with some high frequency traders and those things like
that.
The science is the natural element that what we're actually doing, what trend
following is actually doing, is providing liquidity to hedgers.
And it's creating an equilibrium in the markets and we have to get paid for that.
That's why this has worked for 800 years.
If the price of oil, for example, is going up, right now it's going down.
But if it's going up, the airline companies will almost certainly need to
sell oil to lock in the future price.
They're not in the business of counter-trend trading.
They just need to sell it to lock in the future price.
We at that point buy it.
It gets just a little technical, but it's conceptually establishing the fact
that it's a naturally occurring concept.
The markets need players like us.
Otherwise, you will have a whole bunch of hedgers and
the markets won't exist.
Michael.
You are speculators.
Alex.
Yes, we're speculators.
Then actually we talk in our book.
There's hedgers, speculators, risk transfer, and you need to have this.
But it cannot be, when you think about evolutionary things,
it cannot be a free lunch.
If I made money in every single trend following trade,
the hedgers will stop hedging.
Sometimes their hedge turns out to be a good idea.
Sometimes they would have turned out better not to have hedged.
Sometimes I will look better if I bought oil or
I look better if I somehow ignored that trade.
Of course, we take all trend following trades.
It's supposed to be slightly painful, but in the end,
if you look at the last 800 years,
the data shows that equilibrium risk-adjusted returns are pretty good,
and they're slightly painful.
That's why you can have a couple of bad years or you can have drawdowns.
If it was too good, you would have every hedger hiring a quant from my class
and running moving average systems to time their hedges.
It's the equilibrium of the markets that establishes this principle,
and that's what makes it work for over 800 years.
Trend following is almost unique in that area.
A lot of convergent-type strategies are very limited in their capacity,
very limited in what they can do,
because if five other people discover it, it could be gone.
It's a naturally occurring phenomenon in the markets,
and then it's just a matter of a handful of different ways of actually capturing it.
But it's there.
It almost cannot go away.
It can temporarily not work, but it just structurally cannot disappear,
otherwise you might as well shut down the markets and go back to communism.
Michael, you were born in the former Soviet Union.
What country were you born in, Alex?
Alex, well, actually, I don't know.
I've had my passport changed several times.
My US passport originally used to say USSR because I came to the US
when the USSR still existed.
So technically, I was born in the former Soviet Union,
but then they called me up and they said,
okay, we need to change your passport because this new country got created
called Ukraine, and now we have to reprint your passport to say born in Ukraine.
But now, with what's going on there, they might call me tomorrow and say,
okay, we have to reprint your passport.
Now you were born, I don't know, Russia or something else.
Michael, here's where I want to go with bringing it up.
It's not for a flippant reason.
What age did you come to America?
Alex, 12.
Michael, did you have an advantage coming from where you came?
Was there a built-in drive, a motivation that you think gave you an advantage
over other peers that you might have seen in America once you got to America?
Alex, I probably don't have hours to speak about the immigrant drive, but
that's the immigrant drive that got me going on interviews and
an area that I had no clue about.
At that point, it was sort of survival and making money, not this grand idea.
I'm going to become a finance person.
It's the bouncing around from washing dishes, which was my first job,
to this, to pay for schools.
Certainly, my parents didn't have money to really pay for anything back then.
It's just the inherent immigrant drive to keep pushing.
I had a job before I went to the interview for Larry, but
I just wanted to do better.
I don't know if there was any other advantage other than just keep pushing,
keep driving.
Don't assume somebody's going to hand it to you.
Larry, you've probably heard stories from him.
He's had a disadvantage with not being able to see and those kinds of things.
I had a small disadvantage in the beginning.
I couldn't even speak English, so that's why I had a dishwashing job.
Nobody had to tell me what to do.
If there's a pile of dishes, then I had to wash them.
Michael, meeting Larry was an opportunistic type thing because,
let's face it, I know from when I first met Larry,
he gave me so much of his time and energy and we met so many times.
I feel Larry is the type of guy that if he sees somebody trying and
really pushing, he is the kind of guy that reaches down and says, okay,
I'll give you my time.
If you're really hungry, I'll give you my time.
I feel very fortunate to have met Larry.
It's changed my life to meet people like Larry.
Alex, I started at Mint not as some kind of a master.
I started as a technical guy doing some programming.
I was quite a low level person.
I could have stayed as a technologist for any number of years, but
again, it's that drive to see what else.
I hung close to Larry, got to know about know what you don't know and
what he means.
I kept asking him about it, and that's how I moved up.
I grabbed my opportunities, but again,
that's not a Russian thing per se, it's just the immigrant drive.
I've got to go get it, otherwise it's not going to come to me.
Michael, my great grandfather came from Lithuania in the early 1900s.
And they were in coal mines in Scranton, and
his kids became doctors and engineers.
So it happens quick when they've got the drive.
Alex, washing dishes obviously wasn't going to make me money,
so I had to cut the loss there.
I did work for one year out of school in an engineering role.
I worked for RCA on high definition television,
because I had a degree in electrical engineering.
It was not losing me money per se, so it's not technically a losing trade.
But it was not going to take me anywhere.
I had to cut my losses there.
I just trend followed my way into this.
Trend following is a good general philosophy of life.
It's not just on markets.
It's how people live anyway.
This is why trend following in the markets works,
because that's how people are.
Michael, when people look at trend following performance across
the many managers out there, and we don't have to name names,
people can go look at the performance.
It's all freely available.
I can see up and down months where trend following traders had a good month.
You might see double the return for one particular trader versus another,
but still, it's pretty easy to see that there's dispersion amongst trend
following CTAs, trend following managers.
Why don't you talk about that dispersion?
Alex, yes, by analogy to equities,
it's actually very simple.
Initially, this is complicated.
This is why a lot of sophisticated investors like the institutions you ask me
about have a hard time getting in, because they feel like they might make
dumb decisions about the space and end up picking the so-called wrong manager,
the wrong trend follower, because they have no understanding of what causes
differences in performance, and they get a little emotional over what
makes one manager better than the other.
Well, is it who made more money last year?
Does that make them better?
They don't know how to step in.
It's actually not that complicated if you make yourself aware that there's
a couple of factors that drive performance.
For example, by analogy to equities in the late 90s,
this is where every internet stock went up 100% every day,
and every brick and mortar stock stayed flat or went down.
You had this so-called dispersion between value and growth.
Most investors understand that.
That's why they'll have both in their portfolio.
Sometimes you have dispersion between small cap and large cap.
If you make just a few, let's call them sub-classifications,
it's not just, okay, trend follower 1, trend follower 2,
trend follower 3.
Okay, those are the trend followers, but they have a particular focus.
If this was equity manager 1, 2, 3, the first one might have been growth focus.
The second one might be value focus.
The third might be small cap.
The fourth might be large cap.
There's going to be some correlation between them,
because those guys are in the stock market.
But there's going to be some fair degree of dispersion.
And in a year like 1999, it could have been 100% degree in dispersion.
Now investors in long only say, okay, I go to my Morningstar little matrix.
And then I need a little bit of value, a little bit of growth.
So I kind of diversify.
Same thing in the trend following space.
You do a little bit of analysis and say, for example,
the words are not the same, so it's not value growth.
It's, for example, we introduce certain factors in the book,
like the speed of trading.
You could do trend following quite slow,
either by choice or if you manage lots of money.
Maybe you have to be a little bit slower because of the size of your assets.
Or you can be a little bit faster.
And you can get different results and
you can attribute that to the speed of trading.
You can also have a market mix bias.
You could trade only the large markets, again, either by choice or because you're big.
Or you can be quite a bit more diversified, like, for
example, we are, trading a lot of smaller markets.
Sometimes those will cause performance differences.
But if you would like to have a portfolio of two or three,
a diversified portfolio of trend followers, it's not that hard.
Just look at a couple of these factors and who's tilted too slow and
who's tilted too fast, and these kinds of things.
Just by analogy to the whole value growth thing.
Just a little bit of effort and
then they can explain quite a bit of the dispersion between the managers.
It's not random because people are sometimes afraid of,
wait, you have eight guys doing the same thing and
you have like this massive difference in performance.
I don't know, what is it?
Some guy has a faster machine or bigger computers and
they get scared because they picked the wrong one.
What is it?
It's not that.
They're doing conceptually the same thing, but
they have certain portfolio tilts that can cause these differences.
And with just a little bit of effort, one can understand them.
Michael, it's all the raging conversations, the media,
Fed watching, rate hikes, interest rates going up.
We don't necessarily know if there's going to be a higher rate environment.
We don't necessarily know how that's going to affect trend following.
Alex, we've looked at it over the 800 year data set.
What happens in a rising interest rate environment?
But let's ask this question.
You think equities might do well in that environment?
I'm no prognosticator, but it's possible they won't.
Will bonds do well in that environment?
Well, almost certainly not because rates go up, then bonds have to go down.
I would put trend following as maybe one of the few things that might do well.
Trend followers are agnostic to direction.
If yields go up, so the prices go down, we will be short bonds.
Now, it hasn't happened for many years that there have been substantial hikes in
the markets, but if you look at the data, we have data on interest rates from 1395.
Venice issued bonds in 1395 called Venetian Bonds.
So we have centuries and centuries of data, plenty of rising rates environments.
And I'll simply say we will make money being short bonds if that happens.
Now, people ask technical questions.
If you're short bonds, you're short carry.
Will that hurt you?
It's not really going to hurt us.
There's going to be almost certainly inflationary pressure somewhere.
So we'd probably make money off commodities.
There'll be some interest we get on cash, as it's a technicality.
But most trend followers put up T-bills as margins.
So we'll make more money on margin.
We'll make more money on something called the roll yield in commodities,
because we have to roll futures contracts.
When you put all this together, it should be pretty good.
At least we're going to have a pretty good chance of making money.
A better chance of making money in a rising rate environment than a fixed income portfolio.
Let's put it that way.
And meanwhile, look, some macro funds out there and not naming names,
they have been betting on a rising rate environment for how long?
And they've been losing money on that.
Of course, at some point, rates will go up.
It has to be a truism, maybe in our next life or something.
But at some point, they have to go up.
But look at Japan.
Where's a law that says 10-year rates in the US can't go down more?
I don't know.
Meanwhile, we're making quite a bit of money on the trend that's in front of us now.
When it turns, there'll be a little bit of pain, and
then we'll make money the other way.
This is the peril of timing.
Because you could sit there frozen like a deer in headlights,
ignoring what's going on now, not making money out of it, betting on a rate hike.
When is it going to happen?
No one knows how to time those things.
So just let a trend following system time it.
And meanwhile, let's take the money and put it in our pocket from rates going down.
What's wrong with that?


# Chapter 36

These are the sidebar quotations from Chapter 16.
I don't care what town you're born in, what city, what country.
If you're a child, you are curious about your environment.
You're overturning rocks, you're plucking leaves off of trees and petals off of flowers,
looking inside, and you're doing things that create disorder in the lives of the adults
around you.
—Neil deGrasse Tyson
The most erroneous stories are those we think we know best, and therefore never scrutinize
or question.
—Steven J. Gould
No one is dumb who is curious.
The people who don't ask questions remain clueless throughout their lives.
—Neil deGrasse Tyson
"'Absence of evidence is not evidence of absence,' Carl Sagan.
Don't bet your deli to win a pickle.
Very height."
The solution often turns out more beautiful than the puzzle.
—Richard Dawkins
If you can laugh at your mistakes, it's a good thing.
—Hazy Osborne
It can be asserted without evidence, can also be dismissed without evidence.
—Christopher Hitchens
If you personalize losses, you can't trade.
—Bruce Kovner
If you hear a prominent economist using the word equilibrium or normal distribution, do
not argue with him.
Just ignore him or try to put a rat down his shirt.
—Naseem Taleb
Success isn't permanent, and failure isn't fatal.
—Mike Ditka
Very hard what interests you the most in the most undisciplined, irreverent, and original
manner possible, —Richard Feynman
If you put in stops and run your profits and trade randomly, you make money.
And if you put in targets and no stops and you trade randomly, you lose money.
So the old saw about cutting losses and running profits has some truth to it, —David Harding.
One of the best ways to make money is not to lose money, —Michael Milken
I can live with doubt and uncertainty in not knowing.
I think it is much more interesting to live not knowing than to have answers that might
be wrong.
If we will only allow that, as we progress we remain unsure, we will leave opportunities
for alternatives, we will not become enthusiastic for the fact, the knowledge, the absolute
truth of the day, but remain always uncertain.
In order to make progress, one must leave the door to the unknown ajar.
—Richard Feynman
I'm a big fan of people that operate in the world of publish and iterate versus, you know,
think, think, think, think.
—Kevin Plank, Under Armour


# Chapter 37

Chapter 17 Campbell Harvey
Campbell Harvey is a Canadian economist known for his work on asset allocation with changing risk and
risk premiums and emerging markets finance. He is currently the J. Paul Sticht Professor
of International Business at Duke University's Fuqua School of Business in Durham, North Carolina.
Michael, outline your example that goes into American football and let people slowly come into
your thinking.
Campbell, there are plenty of sports examples here, and football is one of them where a team
could have many wins in a row or a quarterback many passes in a row. And the issue, is that
due to skill, is it luck, or is it a combination? It's also the case that a quarterback could
appear to do quite poorly and not make that many passes. That doesn't necessarily mean
that quarterback lacks skill. It could just be bad luck. It's the same thing with investment
managers where you can outperform the market many, many years in a row. It's not clear that's
a result of skill or a result of just good luck. It is a vexing problem in finance. How do we
separate the skill from the luck? Michael, as you were talking about beating the market for many
years in a row, I thought of someone. I'm quite fond of him. He's liked some of my work and I've
had a chance to meet with him several times. He had a fantastic run at Legg Mason and that's Bill
Miller. I think he beat the S&P for 14 years in a row. But then, at the end of the 14-year stretch,
there was a pretty significant drawdown in the 08 crisis. So, as you make this point about skill
versus luck, there's no doubt it's not an easy subject. Campbell. No, it can be a combination,
that's the thing. It's really interesting if you group the best-performing hedge funds or
mutual funds and then hold those for the next period and just keep on doing that. You just
buy the winners, like the extreme winners. You just have that as a strategy. Then what
you find is that portfolio does poorly. Some of the very top probably were blessed with
good luck. That doesn't mean they're unskilled. It could still be skilled. But they were skilled
plus the luck that got them up there and this is the way that I usually like to explain it.
Suppose that you just, like, grab a whole bunch of dice, like a large number, let's say 36 dice,
and you drop them on the table, and then you go pick out all of the ones that show six,
and let's say there's about seven of them. You take all the other dice away off the table,
then you drop the ones that all have six, and you're going to get a combination of one, two,
three. It's going to average about three, and think of that as the people that did really well.
The sixes are the people that were at the very top that did the best. Then,
when you threw those dice again, it's just natural that you're not going to get seven
sixes from those dice. A lot of this has to do with regression to the mean and luck.
Michael. I was thinking of two traitors. One very famous, one not so famous,
but just as successful. Jim Simons at Renaissance Technologies. He's had math
formulas named after him. He will come out loudly and clearly and always say,
hey, I'm a very lucky guy. That's not taking away from his skill. I could think of the most
famous USA investor, the wealthiest USA investor. He says, look, I won the ovarian lottery. That's
Warren Buffett. The notion of survivorship bias starts to become an interesting topic,
because if we look at a particular trading strategy or particular traders, and not to
take away anything from Warren Buffett, but there's not a lot of other Warren Buffets.
Campbell. That's true. Jim Simons, Warren Buffett, or probably...
Michael. They're up there as stars. Campbell. They are up there, and they are saying,
I was lucky. Really, that's a hard one to believe. I know Jim Simons,
and I don't know Warren Buffett. They do very different things. From what I know of Simon's
operations, there's a lot of skill there, but as you say again, it can be a combination
of having skill and good luck. Michael. You've got to have a strategy that puts you in a position
to benefit when the unexpected happens. If one has a strategy that can operate like that,
that starts to be skill-like. Campbell. Definitely. Again, it might not always work.
Michael. Process versus outcome. You can have a great process,
and it doesn't necessarily mean that outcome's going to be beautiful every time.
Campbell. You mentioned survivorship bias. There's a kind of reverse type of bias,
and that is that some very skilled investment managers drop out because they've had bad luck.
That's kind of a reverse survivorship bias. This is really important. This idea
doesn't just apply to investment managers. Let me discuss, just for a minute,
another research paper I have that does a psychometric survey of CEOs.
What my paper finds is that CEOs are hugely more tolerant of risk than the lay population,
like by a factor of 10. It's extraordinary. You can think of a scenario where these people
that are very tolerant of risk enter a firm as a junior employee. They take a lot of risk,
and some of them, they get lucky, it turns out. Others don't get lucky, and they drop out of the
firm. Then these people that are taking a lot of risk with enough luck will rise to the top
and be the CEO, whereas the person that's risk-averse never takes that extra bit of risk and never
experiences the good luck and is stuck in the middle. This explains why CEOs happen to be very
tolerant of risk. The interplay of that plus luck goes a long way to explain the psychometric
qualities of CEOs. Michael. I can think of two heads of investment banks who until the fall of
2008, for the vast population out there that understood what they did, they were Prince
Charmings. Nothing could go wrong for them, and that's Alan Greenberg at Bear Stearns and Richard
Fould at Lehman Brothers. These were guys that would fit right into the outline you were
describing. But then, on the backside of an entire career of taking more risk, waking up
one day and the dice come up different. Campbell. Exactly, and of course risk is
two-sided, so there's an upside and a downside, and this was an obvious negative realization.
It's really hard because they were on a roll, so to speak. This could be bad luck,
or it could be lack of skill. Michael. I often see people say,
survivorship bias. They're the lucky ones left. What about all the other guys that failed?
The implications being that everyone that failed was as skilled and had the same technique or
same strategy as those winners. I don't necessarily see that evidence. Sometimes we
just assume they were equal, but they're not necessarily equal or taking the same
steps or strategies. Just another facet of this. Campbell. Yes, totally agree. It could
be a much different strategy, but in the end, that's what they choose. You could
think of every investor having a slightly different strategy. Some of them might be chasing real risk
premia. Some of them think they're chasing real risk premia, but it turns out that it's not.
Others are chasing mispricing in the market that might be fleeting. Indeed, it might turn
the other way, that once you start buying, all of a sudden instead of something undervalued,
it's overvalued. There's a myriad of different strategies out there, and some of them will turn
out because they should turn out, like capturing a long-term risk premia, and some of them will
turn out just by luck. Michael. Was it random? Campbell. That's correct. We don't do a very good
job at questioning the performance and saying, was this due to luck or was it due to skill?
We look at these investment manager stars and think they've got a huge amount of skill,
and we don't consider the other side. How much of that is luck? As I said, goes both ways.
You know how often this happens, where you hire an investment manager,
you look at the track record, it's a wonderful track record, you're comfortable with the track
record, you invest with the manager, and then they have like one or two years of subpar performance
and then you fire them. As soon as you fire them, the next year they do great.
Well, what's the story there? It's a simple story, like I mentioned, with the dice.
You have a couple of years of bad luck. Indeed, in the track record, there's probably a couple
of years like that, too, but you tend to ignore that. You fire the person at exactly the
wrong time and you pay the price. Investors just don't do a very good job of attempting to
weigh the balance of luck and skill. Michael, one of the reasons many people get confused
is we want to think in terms of a nice normal distribution because it works great for weights
and heights and all this kind of stuff. Everything's just normally distributed,
but in the real world of asset management and trading and investing, there's something called
SKU. Campbell. This is an important component of my own research. There's a path-breaking paper
published in 1952 by Harry Markowitz on how to optimize a portfolio. That paper led to a Nobel
Prize for him in 1990. And what this paper does is it says what we want is a portfolio with the
best possible target return with the lowest volatility for that level of target return.
Essentially, this is the optimal tradeoff of an expected return and risk. And I'd like to put
risk in quotations because in this path-breaking paper, there's a footnote that's buried at the
end of the paper that says, this is only appropriate if the asset returns are normal
and investors have no preference for SKU. Let me explain what that actually means.
If the asset returns are so-called normally distributed, then there's no unusual tail
behavior. That means there's no severe downside, there's no severe upside. The upside and the
downside are exactly symmetric. With the usual measure of volatility, that's exactly what happens.
For example, you could have a stock that is going up dramatically.
Maybe it goes up like 300, 400 percent, and it's got a high level of volatility.
You can have another stock that goes down dramatically, maybe goes down 95 percent.
And it's got the exact same level of volatility. Volatility doesn't tell you anything about the
direction. It's measuring the surprise in an absolute sense. Volatility is symmetric.
It treats the upside and the downside the same. SKU, on the other hand, tells us the balance
between the upside and the downside. You could have two portfolios that have the same target return,
the same volatility, but they've got a different SKU. One has got an abnormally high probability of
a severe downside. The other has got an abnormally high probability of severe upside. For any investor,
it's obvious which one to choose. You choose the one that has got more upside than downside.
I've been on a campaign for many years to try to change the way that we think of risk,
to change the way that we actually do asset management or portfolio management.
Take this asymmetry between the upside and the downside and recognize that it is rare that any
asset return is so-called normally distributed. Actually, make that part of the portfolio
management exercise, and equally as important, make it part of the risk management exercise.
I am tired of hearing about these 20 standard deviation events, like what happened to Swiss
Frank. And there's many other examples during the financial crisis, the Russian crisis, etc.
20 standard deviation events? It's not like 20 standard deviations. It's only 20 if you
believe naively these asset returns are normally distributed. They're not, so don't even tell
me this. It doesn't make any sense. Michael. I've had Harry Markowitz on my show. He was
surprised at how the industry took his work, and he wasn't part of what happened,
but they took his work and ran with it, and that was essentially how
modern finance got built off of his work. That's a fair synopsis, isn't it?
Campbell. Yes, that 1952 paper is an amazing paper. I've only mentioned one thing that he
foresaw. I think that this was a simple framework he proposed. It works under special assumptions.
He was the one that recognized what those assumptions were, but then you're right.
The industry goes with something and doesn't think about when is it appropriate to apply and
when isn't it? When I teach finance at Duke University, as one of the main lessons from
my students, we've got these models. But all these models are wrong. That's why they're
called a model. You're simplifying reality. And the issue of applying your skill is knowing
when to apply a simplified framework and when not to. In certain situations, it's fine.
Other situations, no. Harry is really the father of modern finance, and that paper is just an
incredible piece of work given that he saw not just the usefulness of his simplified framework,
but he saw basically how to take it to the next level and to incorporate this idea of skew.
Michael. Your paper evaluating trading strategies caught my eye for one thing in particular.
I assumed that I knew the advisor you were talking about, which was AHL,
which is a managed futures trading trend following operation owned by man out in London.
Campbell. It's a managed futures house that manages about 15 billion dollars. At AHL,
they look at strategies all the time. They think very deeply about luck versus skill.
There is a strategy that showed a cumulative profit from 2004 through 2014. It's a graph,
and it's basically going straight up. It's an extraordinary strategy where it's got one
year that has a very small negative return in 2004. It knocks the ball out of the park
during the financial crisis. It's got about a 15% annualized return, 15% volatility. So,
the so-called sharp ratio of one. Extremely consistent. We're looking at this strategy,
and you can see people's head nodding. Yes, this is the sort of thing we want to put some
capital on, and then the very next slide is really surprising. It adds to this graph the other
199 purely random strategies. All of a sudden, this graph that was just one line going straight
up is added to 199 things that basically are centered around zero. The exercise was to
simulate 200 random strategies with a target return of zero, so every single one has no
skill and is purely generated numbers with 15% volatility. You see the very top one. The very
best one is the one that was shown first, and then you see at the bottom there's like a terrible
one that earns 15% negative and everything in between. The idea is that by pure random chance,
and that's what the random number generator is doing, by random chance you're going to see
strategies that look great. You need to be careful if you're doing internal research.
What you don't want is your researchers sifting through hundreds of strategies and picking off
the top one, because when you put money on that top one in real time, it's going to do poorly.
Michael. This was AHL presenting, correct? Campbell. They are leading edge in terms of
thinking about luck versus skill. This was part of an exercise on how to avoid overfitting of
back tests. That's why that exhibit is there, because it is a great example that you could
easily be fooled by random strategies. Michael. What is your perspective,
your thoughts about the work of Nassim Taleb? Campbell. That it fits in really well with
my work on skewness. He talks about so-called black swan events, and again, these events
that are negative 20 standard deviation events. It doesn't make any sense unless it's a normal
distribution, because within a normal distribution, the probability of something like that happening
is like one event in the life of the universe, which doesn't make any sense. He's talking about
these things that you don't necessarily see in historical data, but then they happen.
You could think of it as an extreme negative skew type of event. That works in pretty well because
his view of the world, has my view of the world, is that it's not symmetrically distributed,
it's not normally distributed, and I think that's important.
Michael. Many managed futures trading strategies, obviously, are trend following in nature,
and they are predicated on not knowing what's going to happen next. A lot of their risk
premia come from the hedgers out there. People make arguments about where their source of profits
come from. There's a thinking, a long-standing thinking, that goes behind this particular
strategy, and you're making the point that, if you just sit down at your computer,
and you really have not even philosophically thought through what the strategy is,
and then you only want to trust some random systems that come up, you can wake up in trouble.
Even if, initially, all your investors are sold on the idea of 15% returns and 15% volatility,
and that sounds great, and you raise $1 billion, but if there's not a sound economic thinking
behind this strategy, we all know what's going to happen.
Campbell. That's correct. This is the way that it should work. I do know from direct experience,
this is the way that it does work at a firm like MAN AHL, and maybe it's no surprise they've done
so well with this. Basically, a researcher would come up with an idea, but without looking at
the data. They come up with an economic framework, and then they actually pitch that framework in a
seminar. I'll call it that, an academic seminar. They will get feedback, and then the senior people
will actually decide whether the economic idea makes enough sense that you actually go to the data.
Let's say it does make sense. Then the firm will give the researcher what's known as a random
partition of the history of the data. They will give bits and pieces of the history to the
researcher. The researcher will then test the economic idea, and this is the so-called
in-sample testing, and then there will be another seminar. The results will be presented, and then a
decision will be made whether to give the rest of the data to test it in a so-called out-of-sample
test. It might be killed, or it might go ahead to the out-of-sample. Let's say it actually
goes to the other sample, and let's say it does well. Then there's a further stage where it will
be invested in, but only invested with internal money. It's multiple stages that you actually
have to go through until it gets to the client, because you really don't want to put anything
to client trading that might be a result of luck, because you don't want to disappoint your clients.
All the incentives are running in the right direction to do the best possible thing for
your client. Michael. I was giving a presentation in Singapore, and I was speaking about the
managed futures trading strategy of trend following. And at the end of the presentation,
this young lady raised her hand, and she had this look that said she probably had been at
Duke in one of your classes, and was really was bright. She had that look that said,
oh, man, I'm in trouble. She's going to kill me. She's going to obliterate me. I'm dead.
She raises her hand, and she immediately shot herself in the foot, and I want you to explain
why. She immediately said, okay, can you tell me about the sharp ratio of these strategies?
I wanted to do a Vulcan mind meld and just say, hold on. Don't just immediately assume
the sharp ratio is the be-all end-all. Let's at least pick apart the pros and cons of the sharp
ratio. But you could just see the indoctrination as she asked the question.
Campbell. Yes, incredibly naive. But this is the way it is in the industry on both sides,
buy side, sell side, that people will look at an investment, look at the sharp ratio,
which is the expected excess return usually over some benchmark divided by the volatility.
They're only considering the volatility risk. And let me tell you the type of trouble
that gets you into. If you do the sharp ratios of different investment styles,
or maybe even hedge fund returns, you'll see a wide variation in the average sharp ratios.
You'll see gigantic sharp ratios for things like convertible arbitrage,
but more modest sharp ratios for things like managed futures, trend following.
The reason is very clear once you expand the way you think about risk.
Managed futures has got positive skew, and it's almost by construction,
because when things are going up, you're buying. That's the same as replicating a long call option.
When things are going down, you're selling. That's like replicating a long put option.
Effectively, you can think of managed futures as something with a long,
straddle-like performance, which has got positive skew. They do really well in market meltdowns,
and they do well when the market's going up sharply.
That is something that is rewarded by investors. They actually like that. It provides a hedge.
Whereas those other sharp ratios, very high sharp ratio strategies,
they've got a severe negative skew. For them, you need to have extra return on average because
investors really don't like that severe downside. You cannot compare two strategies based upon a
sharp ratio if they have different skew properties. The sharp ratio does not take that into account.
Indeed, it's very similar to what we were talking about earlier with a simple market,
with its framework where you look at expected target return divided by volatility.
Volatility is not a sufficient metric for risk. It is part of the story. It's not the entire
story. If you make the mistake of just looking at volatility, then it's going to lead to a
portfolio that will disappoint you. Michael. Thinking back to that example with a young lady,
I don't know if it was, I don't want to listen, or I don't understand,
or I've already got my mind made up. The indoctrination strikes me.
Campbell. Well, it's complicated because this sort of discussion is not even in the textbooks
in finance. It's kind of surprising. So you can go through a top program and not learn this.
Michael. That is the truest statement. Anyone reading right now that doubts you,
I want them to go find where you're wrong. Campbell. Yes, it's one of the reasons I don't
use a textbook for what I teach. I teach out of my own notes on my own research articles.
But this is something that you have to point a lot of fingers here, including pointing fingers
at my own colleagues. I just don't think that we do a good job of explaining risk to our
students. I think in my class there's about three classes where we just sit down and think
about what risk actually is. Michael. You're making a fantastic point there. Put aside all
the jargon and get people to conceptually wrap their arms around the idea of what skew is,
and even getting rid of the word skew, so to speak, and getting people to sit down and look
at it all. A freshman in high school with no math training, if properly explained what's going on,
could understand. Campbell. Yes, I agree. Let me give the other insight from Markowitz's article
that is relevant for this discussion, and that is that his framework assumes that you exactly know
all of the inputs, you exactly know the volatilities, you exactly know correlations between
assets, and you exactly know the target return. There's no uncertainty in any events, whereas in
the practice of management there is uncertainty. So another dimension of risk is that you think
the correlation is, let's say, 0.5, but you're not sure. Maybe it's 0.2, maybe it's 0.7,
but it's certainly not exactly 0.5. The same for volatility. You think it's 15,
but you're uncertain. Maybe it's 12, maybe it's 17. This is another dimension of risk.
Most people think, risk is just the volatility. Another way of thinking about risk is,
what if you don't know what the volatility is? Even deeper, what if you don't know the
distribution? It's not normal, we kind of know that, but what is it? Or the skew. We don't know
what that downside tail actually is. We can maybe estimate it, but we're not sure. All of this
is risk, and it's rarely taken into account at this level that there's a difference between
risk and uncertainty. People usually group those together, and it shows they really haven't thought
it through. Michael. It would be a long story to get to the point as to why many of them have
developed a faulty foundation, but the fact is that so many decision makers in charge of other
people's money think that somehow or another there is a perfect prediction for tomorrow and
that estimates are a bad thing, when estimates are basically all we've got. It's really crazy
that we've got to a position where so many people that think the world of investment management is
supposed to be perfection. It's an insane notion. Campbell. And unfortunately, the actual investors
reinforce this because they will judge the manager based upon the past quarter or the past year,
and that leads to a different type of behavior on the part of the manager.
I would much prefer, as I said earlier, take a look at the track record. You're comfortable
with it. Fine. And what I actually recommend is that the investment managers educate the client
as to what could happen. One way of doing this is really simple. Let's say I've got a 20-year track
record. What I can do is to create with a real data from those 20 years an alternative history
by kind of randomly sampling years and put them together, and then keep on doing that. Then
it gives you a way to look at what things could look like given the track record. Then when it
actually happens, maybe you've got two years in a row of substandard performance, you can look at
the history and say, that's not unusual. That happens 25% of the time given the track record.
If you believe the actual track record and you actually analyze it in this way of creating
alternative histories, then it really helps avoid the mistake of firing a skilled manager
because they've had bad luck. Michael, if I see 1% a month every month every year,
I'm either thinking it's Bernie Madoff Jr. or another long-term capital management.
You can't make money every month. Maybe there's somebody with a high-frequency shop
that's got some advantage that no one else has, but it just doesn't work that way.
Campbell, yes, this is a great example. You've got somebody that is basically in an S&P 500
portfolio, but on top of the S&P 500, they're writing out of the money put options and out
of the money call options. If there's not that much volatility, you're collecting a premium.
Month after month, given that premium that you're collecting, they beat the market.
One percent here, two percent, one percent, two percent. It keeps on going. It is foolish
to think that is beating the market or alpha or whatever you want to call it.
That's called taking risk. Because if the market goes severely down,
then you've got these put options you have to pay off. It magnifies the downside of holding
the S&P 500, and on top of that, it cuts off the upside because if the market goes up substantially,
you need to pay out for the call options. All that does is take a portfolio, the S&P 500,
and tilt it towards negative skew. And that's the reason that you see a return pattern like
this. People are getting a little extra return because at some point,
there's going to be a severe downside. That is important to take into account.
Michael. It's cliche, but that free lunch isn't always so free.


# Chapter 38

These are the side margin quotations from Chapter 17.
We know that we know almost nothing, but the almost nothing we know isn't completely nothing,
and we only bet on that.
DAVID HARDING
The reason the trend following or the systematic investing industry has gotten so big is because
it has been successful. No one should miss that point.
DAVID HARDING
Mean reversion works almost all the time, and then it stops and you are kind of out
of business. Jerry Parker
The only sound reason for my buying a stock is that it is rising in price. If that is happening,
no other reason is required. If that is not happening, no other reason is worth considering.
Nicholas Darvus
Talk sense to a fool and he calls you foolish. Euripides. 484 B.C. to 406 B.C.
OCTOBER
This is one of the peculiarly dangerous months to speculate in stocks in. The others are
July, January, September, April, November, May, March, June, December, August, and February.
Mark Twain
I actually went into business thinking I could automate everything and then a machine would
do it all. Blair Hull
It is easier to do many things than to do one thing continuously for a long time. Marcus
Fabius Quintilian
Roman Order
I fear not the man who has practiced ten thousand kicks once, but I fear the man who has practiced
one kick ten thousand times. Bruce Lee
The brain is like a muscle. When it is in use we feel very good. Understanding is joyous.
Carl Sagan
A delusion is something that people believe in despite a total lack of evidence.
Richard Dawkins
I wish that I may never think the smiles of the great and powerful a sufficient inducement
to turn aside from the straight path of honesty and the convictions of my own mind, David Ricardo.
The further a society drifts from the truth, the more it will hate those who speak it.
Anonymous
Too many people simply give up too easily. You have to keep the desire to forge ahead
and you have to be able to take the bruises of unsuccessful success. Success is just one
long street fight.
Milton Burrell


# Chapter 39

Chapter 18, Lassa Heja Peterson.
Lassa Heja Peterson is a Danish financial economist
known for his research on liquidity risk and asset pricing.
He is the John A. Paulson Professor of Finance
and Alternative Investments
at the New York University Stern School of Business.
He is also a principal at AQR Capital Management.
Michael, efficiently inefficient,
the title of your new work.
You could say it's new ground,
but we've all seen where the Nobel Prize
was split between Fama and Schiller.
And I'm guessing there was a certain inspiration
for your title from that.
If not, tell me the inspiration.
Lassa, yes, that's right.
So there's been this long academic debate
about whether the markets are efficient and Eugene Fama,
he stands for this view that markets are fully efficient
and prices reflect the fundamental value of securities
versus prices are inefficient.
And Schiller, he sort of represents the opposite point of view
that market prices are irrational.
They're driven by investors irrationality
and investors push prices far away
from their fundamental values.
I have a great respect for both Fama and Schiller.
I know them both well,
but I wanted to take a different point of view.
One that is somewhere between,
but also tries to be well-defined
saying that market prices are neither fully efficient
nor completely inefficient.
But they are inefficient enough
that smart asset managers and active investors
have a chance to beat the market
and be compensated for all the costs they have associated
with actually becoming informed
about asset prices and trading.
At the same time,
market prices are efficient enough
that the marginal investor is sort of indifferent
about pursuing this active investing
with the benefits being better performance,
but the costs being transaction costs,
asset management fees,
and the costs associated
with finding a good asset manager.
There's that equilibrium
in which markets are at the right place
and in between they're efficiently inefficient.
Michael, George Soros and David Harding
are dogmatic about the efficient market hypothesis
is fill in the blank bad word.
So how did the managers and traders in your book
feel about your perspective?
Lassa, yes, that's a great question.
Definitely you're right that many of these managers,
they would certainly not feel
that markets are fully efficient.
They feel very strongly their job is to beat the market
and they succeed in that job
not because they're just lucky,
but because markets are not efficient.
You're right, David Harding's thought
is strongly against the efficient market hypothesis.
A lot of these guys at the same time are sympathetic
to this view that yes,
there is a way to have an edge,
but you must be very efficient
to exploit these market inefficiencies.
That's sort of another interpretation of the title
and I think they're actually quite sympathetic
to this view.
They don't think just anybody off the street
can easily beat the market.
You have to be really efficient to actually accomplish that.
Michael, obviously you know the managers and their styles,
but what about your connection with them?
Lassa, I certainly knew all of them.
They're all extremely famous.
I knew some of them well.
I knew Cliff Asness.
He's my colleague at AQR Capital Management.
So he was the one by far I knew the best.
I knew Myron Scholes quite well
through my meeting him at academic conferences.
I also knew John Polson.
He endowed a chair at NYU
when I was lucky enough
to actually hold the John Polson chair.
Several of the others I had never met,
it was really exciting and fun to meet these guys
and get their perspective on how they invest
and try to get an opportunity
to ask them exactly how they do it,
what motivates them
and what are the key drivers of their success.
Michael, was there a common theme developing
in how they thought regardless of style or technique?
Lassa, obviously they're all very smart.
They are all extremely driven and ambitious.
They are all disciplined and clear thinkers.
In terms of their investment styles and methods,
they're very different,
but there are some common themes.
Even though they use very different words,
a lot of them are using trading strategies
related to value investing and momentum trading.
Cliff Asness has actually written academic papers
and was one of the discoverers of momentum trading
and stocks together with a few other academics.
He talks a lot about value momentum,
but a guy like George Soros,
he'll talk in very different terms.
He will talk about trading on boom bust cycles,
for instance,
but when he says he's riding the boom,
in some sense he's a momentum trader
and when he positions himself for the bust,
at that point he effectively becomes a value investor.
When you think about Lee Ainslie,
who's a famous tiger cub,
he's done very well in trading stocks globally.
Obviously, value investing and thinking about
the quality of those companies is a key driver.
And value is also a key driver for a short seller
like James Chinos,
who thinks about which company is overvalued,
which company might be fraudulent
or have some little bit of too creative accounting
and so on.
He wants to short those.
And in shorting all value firms,
he's basically taking the short side
of being a value investor.
Michael, you bring up a great point
about terminology and jargon.
I think to the classic phrase Soros uses, reflexivity.
It's a term with a certain philosophical bent to it.
He's written several books,
but a great place where you can take apart
some of the jargon and perhaps
with your best professorial hat
is to describe the different types of momentum.
AQR is obviously known for both types.
You mentioned Cliff and the type of momentum
that he discovered,
but time series momentum,
the type of momentum that might be more commonly called
trend following,
can you compare and contrast the two types of momentum?
LASA, what's called momentum in stock trading,
it's also called cross-sectional momentum.
It means looking at the different stocks
and seeing which stocks have outperformed other stocks.
Then you will tend to go long
the stocks that have been outperforming
while at the same time shorting stocks
that have been underperforming.
Then you're basically hoping
that those outperforming stocks over the last,
let's say six to 12 months
will continue to outperform over the next month.
That is to be compared with what's called
time series momentum,
which means looking typically at an index,
whether it's a stock index or a currency or commodity,
and basically seeing if it's going up and down.
If it's been trending up over the last year,
let's say time series momentum
is looking at markets in isolation,
whereas cross-sectional momentum
is looking at relative outperformance.
The difference is, for instance,
let's say the whole stock market has been going down.
In a cross-sectional momentum investment,
you might go long stocks
that have been dropping less in value.
Suppose all the stocks in a given universe
have been actually going down.
Some of them have been going down less,
so those are outperforming.
A cross-sectional momentum investor would buy those
and short those that drop by more.
Whereas the time series momentum investor
or managed futures type of investor,
he would just short all of them.
He would say, they're all trending down.
Let me short all of them.
Michael, you mentioned the idea
these very diverse traders and managers have commonalities.
One of the commonalities is gambler's ruin,
risk of ruin.
Lassa.
Yes, they're certainly all quite aware of risk management
and several of them actually told me
about some of their losing trades.
A lot of them are very happy about their winning trades,
but they have learned a lot from their losing trades.
It's really important that you learn
from your losing trades,
but also that you don't go bankrupt from them.
Michael, are there any examples
from a particular trader or manager
and a losing trade that come to mind?
Lassa.
Yes, certainly.
Lee Ainslie talks about one particular losing trade
when he had a great investment thesis.
His analysis was correct,
but it turned out the management
that we're supposed to deliver on these great promises
for that particular company
were not capable of doing it.
He really learned the importance of management
and has since really paid very close attention
to the management of the companies he invests in.
Also, Chano's talks about a short position he had
that kept moving against him for a variety of reasons.
Fortunate for him, he has a position limit.
So as the short position moves against him,
it gets bigger.
And this is one of the risks of short selling.
When you're short selling,
you lose when the stock price goes up.
When the stock price goes up,
you have a fixed number of shares.
Now you're actually short more dollars or bigger value,
and the risk potentially increases.
Therefore, he has a position limit
and he would actually reduce his position
as the position moved against him.
And that helped him to limit losses
in that particular trade.
Michael.
Most people that they're familiar with Julian Robertson
and the Tiger Cub story,
it's a fundamental style of thinking and trading.
I thought what was interesting was your questioning
to Lee Ainslie about his quantitative aspects
of his trading methodology,
particularly portfolio construction.
Lassa.
Yes, that's right.
He has a number of investment professionals
who go out and meet with management
and meet with different competitors
to try to really understand the industry
where each company operates.
But at the same time,
he told me they actually have a quantitative system
to evaluate their positions,
the risk exposures,
and help them make the portfolio construction
as efficient as possible.
Michael.
Looking at all these managers,
looking at these traders,
their track records,
studying their performance,
is there a best strategy?
There are different strategies for different reasons,
but is there a strategy,
do you think across these managers,
these traders,
that's perhaps more repeatable?
There's only one George Soros,
there's only one Paulson.
Do you see a particular style
across this selection of traders
that's more repeatable?
Lassa.
I think what's common among these strategies
is that there is not this magic effort
by this genius,
but we can actually understand
at the core of many of these strategies,
there is an economic logic
behind why they work.
But at the same time,
they require tremendous skill and dedication
and hard work to execute them well.
I talk about equity strategies,
macro strategies,
arbitrage strategies,
and for each of these
I try to understand
what is the basic economics
behind why they work
and how you could create
a repeatable process
that could deliver potential outperformance.
It certainly has to be very difficult to do
because otherwise,
these things would be arbitraged away.
Michael.
In your work,
were you looking for the particular styles
or were you looking
for the particular manager and trader?
Lassa.
I started with thinking about
what are the various classic styles.
And then for each of these eight styles
that I identified,
I sought to get the most prominent current investor
who's still active.
I wrote down these eight names
and I thought,
how am I going to get them to say yes?
I started with the people I knew the best
and then when those guys said yes,
I had a connection to someone
who knew George Soros.
Then Soros said yes
and when I started asking the next people,
it started getting easier
when you have Paulson, Asness, Soros, and the like.
Michael.
Something that Cliff Asness brings up,
you have as a question in your work.
You talk about the difference
between the real world and the academic world.
I like his answer
because we can go back
to a performance track record, for example,
and you can say,
there was a three-year flat period
or there was a significant drawdown,
but then you came out of it
and everything was okay.
Cliff points out that in the real world,
it's not so easy to just look
at track records like that.
Lassa.
That's right.
And he talks about
when you're actually going through such a tough period,
there's a time dilation, he calls it,
where it seems like time is going much more slowly
and it's really painful to have those losses.
Even if you have greater gains coming out of it,
it's an extremely tough period.
That's part of the reason these strategies work
in that it certainly is hard work to do it,
but it's also really stressful
and requires a lot of discipline
to just continue to do the right thing.
When you're starting to face losses,
there's a lot of temptation to panic
or do various things
that were not part of the original plan
because you think those will be too difficult
to handle otherwise.
Michael.
Many traders and managers have to deal with clients
and make sure clients are on board with the strategy
and understand there can be down periods, et cetera,
which leads me to bring something up about Warren Buffett.
Many don't know that Warren Buffett
has had multiple 50% drawdowns.
I don't know the exact number,
but if you're going to produce the type of performance
that he's produced over the years,
you have to be willing to take
and handle a significant down period.
You talk about Buffett and his alpha.
You put together significant insights
where people can ponder,
hold on, if Buffett's a value investor,
why is he so much better than anyone else?
You broke it down and pulled apart
why he is so much better.
Lassa.
Yes, that's right.
We got the data on Buffett's performance
and we also looked at the performance
of Berkshire Hathaway's stock holdings too.
As you know, Buffett is running Berkshire Hathaway
and one way to look at his performance
is to follow that stock price,
but you could also see the publicly traded stocks
that he holds.
Berkshire Hathaway has to make a filing to the SEC
about the publicly traded stocks they own
so we can put together a portfolio
and simulate that portfolio at the same time.
The first thing we looked at is
just how good is Warren Buffett?
How good do you need to be
to become one of the richest people in the world?
And it turns out his sharp ratio is just over 0.7
between 0.7 and 0.8,
which surprised a lot of people
when we showed them this number
because a lot of people had assumed
that he had a sharp ratio above one or even above two
as a lot of hedge funds
are bragging about numbers in that range.
It turns out that he has had tremendously high returns,
but he also had quite significant risk,
leaving him with a sharp ratio
which is still incredibly impressive
because it's about double the sharp ratio of the market.
For the risk he's taking, which has been substantial,
he's over the long haul been able to deliver
double the return relative to that of the market.
It's really an astonishing performance.
How research doesn't in any way
try to diminish that incredible accomplishment,
but when other researchers have looked at it,
they have simply recognized he's a value investor.
He talks about being a value investor
and you can also regress his return
on the returns of being a value investor,
which is called a value factor.
That factor explains some of his performance,
but only a small part,
and it leaves out a huge alpha
that's a big unexplained part.
What we then did is say,
let's also regress on the return
to what we call a quality investor.
What he buys are not just cheap stocks,
but he also buys high quality stocks.
He talks about that in his speeches and his writings,
that he really likes to buy high quality companies
at a reasonable price.
When we actually regress him on both the standard factor,
including value factor,
as well as what we call quality minus junk,
and also a factor that captures more safe stocks
called betting against beta,
then it turns out we can actually explain
a large part of his performance
and get us a strategy
that looks very much like his performance
to explain almost all his alpha.
What we interpret that to be
is he is doing what he's saying he's doing.
Yes, he's a value investor.
He's a quality investor.
He likes to buy stable, profitable,
high quality companies at a reasonable price,
and those types of stocks have done well in general.
The interesting finding is it's not just
the quality firms that he has been buying
that have done well and have been good investments,
it's quality firms in general.
Those types of stocks in general have performed well,
and he has benefited from being a very early investor
to recognize that and exploit it.
And he's been able to leverage it
through his insurance company
in a very clever and very smart way,
and really perform extremely well
as a result of those investment choices
and that leverage strategy.
Michael, he definitely is using leverage to a degree
that perhaps the novice investor
might not understand,
but obviously he's doing it in a very smart way,
but he's not a trader devoid of leverage.
Lassa, yes, that's right.
He speaks quite negatively about leverage often,
and certainly there are risks to leverage.
If you look at his portfolio and his performance,
you can see that he uses leverage in two ways.
Number one is that you can simply look at his balance sheet
and you can see that he has leverage.
He has a number of liabilities.
He's been issued bonds, for instance,
as one source of leverage,
and he has a lot of insurance-related liabilities.
And we estimate his leverage is about 1.6 to one,
meaning that for every dollar of equity capital,
he will then invest in $1.60 of companies.
Another way to see that he's using leverage,
you remember I mentioned that we could simulate
the performance of his portfolio
of publicly traded stocks.
We could look at the volatility,
the risk of that strategy,
and then we can look at the risk
for the volatility of Berkshire Hathaway stock.
Sometimes the volatility of Berkshire Hathaway stock
is bigger than the volatility of his publicly traded stocks.
That suddenly is consistent with the idea
that Berkshire applies leverage to the portfolio.
If you add leverage to a portfolio,
then you will tend to increase the risk,
and that sort of ranking of the risk
is consistent with leverage.
Michael, it's just a tool
and he's using the tool wisely.
Lassa.
That's right, Michael.
Let me move to a quote from Cliff Asness.
Good quant investment managers can really be thought of
as financial economists who have codified their beliefs
into a repeatable process.
They're distinguished by their diversification
sticking to their process with discipline
and the ability to engineer portfolio characteristics.
For those traders out there today
that call themselves more fundamentally driven or value,
is there anybody that's not backtesting their world now?
Lassa.
Yes, there's a lot of discretionary traders
that will look at a unique special situation
that you might have a very hard time backtesting.
If you're an event-driven trader
and there's a new type of event,
perhaps you can't backtest that,
but perhaps you can still convince yourself
that you're buying something at a discount
to its fundamental value.
You're relying on the general principle
that buying things cheap has worked over the long term.
You might not be able to backtest
in a more scientific way this type of strategy,
or if you're trading a new type of security and so on.
The problem is still the majority of investing is done
in a discretionary manner.
Michael.
Do you think guys like Harding, guys like Asness
with this mindset of testing and this quantitative mindset,
is it slowly making a dent in the consciousness
where perhaps investors in the future are going to say,
we want more than discretionary ability?
Are they winning over the head space
or is it in the early stages?
Lassa.
I myself am a quant investor.
I'm a sworn believer in using scientific methods
to evaluate investment strategies.
But at the same time, I try to keep an open mind.
I don't want to say that one method is better
than the other method.
You are right, the more scientific way of investing
has made large inroads over the last 20 years.
But at the same time, there is a role
for discretionary strategies.
I personally have great respect
for some of the more discretionary traders.
When Chano's, for instance, is finding funny things
in the accounting numbers in a way
that you can't really get a computer to do right now,
or when other discretionary traders are doing things
that cannot easily be codified in a computer
because it's more relying on more soft information
or different case by case type of analysis,
I personally have a great respect for that.
So I'm not sure that we'll gravitate
to everybody investing in one way.
I think investing fundamentally
will have many aspects and it's driven
by people having different methods
and different points of view.
That's basically what creates a buyer and a seller.
There are all these different ways of doing it.
Michael, let's talk about the role
of hedge funds in the economy.
The typical understanding is there's often negative press,
especially at chaotic moments.
Words like speculation will be thrown around
in a negative way.
But there is a role for hedge funds in the economy
and it's not just necessarily the investors themselves
that invest in the particular fund.
Some might say, why should I be concerned
with assorted hedge funds?
I'm not invested in these.
Talk about the big picture role of hedge funds.
Lassa, hedge funds can play a very positive role
in the economy for a number of reasons.
First of all, our free market economy
basically allocates resources based on prices.
If somebody invents a drug,
they can cure a particular disease.
He may not have enough capital to pursue that cure,
but he can, this is a very promising idea
that others can't understand.
He can then raise a lot of money
through the capital markets
and then build factories to pursue that idea.
Whereas another inventor who has perhaps
a not very useful idea,
he might have a difficult time raising money
and therefore the machines and the real capital,
the factories are allocated to the more promising idea.
Now that whole notion relies on market prices
being relatively efficient.
The company with the more promising ideas,
their stock price has to be higher.
Their market cap has to be higher
in order for them to be able to really raise more capital
and build more machines.
This is incredibly important
for the market economy and hedge funds.
And other active investors are tending to buy low
and sell high, so they tend to push prices
in the right direction and make markets more efficient.
Again, that's just incredibly important.
They help provide liquidity,
make it easier to buy and sell for investors,
make it easier for people to save for retirement.
A lot of large pension funds are invested
in these types of vehicles and hopefully hedge funds
and other active investors contribute to their performance.
Of course, they take large fees
and they keep a lot of the benefits for their own sake too.
It's certainly fair to say that investors
should be very concerned about the fees
and to what extent they themselves enjoy the benefits
of those investment strategies.
Michael, you asked a question to David Harding.
Does your research suggest that it's better
to have the same type of model for every instrument?
Or is it better to have a very specific model for each one?
Talk about his response
and your feelings about his response.
Lassa, I agree with his response
that it's very important to have a very robust model
that works across a number of different securities.
It's often tempting to tailor your strategy
so it looks like it's the best for every asset.
You might want one particular managed futures,
industry term for time series momentum
or trend following strategy for gold,
another strategy for wheat,
yet another strategy in commodities and so on.
If you try to do something like that,
you might get extremely good performance in your back test
and your simulation of what would have happened in the past
because you'd be able to tailor this.
But you might be exploiting a lot of noise,
a lot of randomness,
and you might end up with a model that works less well
going forward in the future when it really matters,
when you're trading with live ammunition,
and when it's really important that your model works.
To avoid that kind of data mining
or overfitting of your model,
it's often better to have a simpler strategy.
How do you get confidence
that your strategy has a chance to work going forward?
Well, if the same strategy has worked for gold,
not just last year or the last 10 years,
but perhaps the last 50 or 100 years,
and it's the same strategy
that has worked across all the commodities,
not just all the commodities,
it's worked for a bunch of currencies.
If it's worked for equities,
if it's worked also in fixed income markets,
then you start to get a conviction
that this strategy is not randomness.
It's not just a coincidence of the past
that will not repeat itself in the future.
Then you start to get some conviction
that this type of trend following strategy
or managed futures strategy
has a chance to work in the future.
Michael, you are part of the AQR study,
a century of evidence on trend following investing.
Lassa, yes, Michael,
were there any elements or insights
going through that process,
doing that research, doing that study
that surprised you?
Lassa, it was quite an exciting project
because we had been doing a lot of research
on what are the best trend following strategies
and showing that some relatively simple
trend following strategies actually performed extremely well
over the last 20 to 30 years.
And they've worked on average,
not every year or every day,
but on average for every instrument we looked at,
which is sort of unusual.
You think that it's going to work
perhaps at the portfolio level,
but not necessarily for every instrument in the portfolio.
But we found this very consistent performance
even at the instrument level.
We were thinking, wow, this looks really robust,
but how can we get even more conviction?
How can we get another out of sample study?
Of course, one out of sample study
is just waiting and looking
at the live performance going forward.
We didn't have the patience for that,
so we said, let's actually go ahead and collect data,
historical data on prices
that are earlier than what we looked at before.
Rather than looking just over the last 20, 30 years,
let's look at a full century of data.
We were a little bit worried, of course,
that what had seemed like such a robust result
maybe didn't work in this 60 to 70 years prior.
But to our surprise, it worked extremely well,
and also historically about as well
as in the more recent sample.
Michael, you talk about the arms race
and high frequency trading.
There's an arms race amongst trend following managers
to see how many centuries they can go back.
Laughter, you guys inspired with your first paper.
Several others have come right after.
Lassa, that's right, yes.
Michael, one of the things in your conversation
with George Soros, he says that you should not risk
a significant part of your capital,
but if you have a good run
and you're making a lot of profit,
you can risk your profits more
than you can risk your original capital.
That's a very classic time series momentum
trend following type thinking, a very quant thinking.
Did you talk to Soros about the implementation
of his strategies?
Lassa, yes, he has a very different way
of implementing, not so quantitative,
but he's also very concerned
about the downside risk versus upside risk.
What he's really hoping to find is a strategy
or a bet that has a big upside potential
and a limited downside potential,
and then put a lot of money into that bet
like he did on the British pound.
See Soros' 1992 pound trade.
He talks about how he had the courage
to really put such an enormous position
on the British pound, because if the pound broke,
he would make a lot of money.
But given that it was trading in a band,
there was almost no risk that it would make
a large move going against him.
And that type of thinking, he told me,
inspired John Paulson in the way
he sized his subprime bet.
I asked John Paulson whether it was true
that he got the idea to size the bet he did,
the way he did from Soros,
and he confirmed that in the interview.
Michael, everyone has to look with deep admiration
because many of the traders that you talk about
would not have the latitude to take those kind of bets.
There's obviously a certain discretionary element.
I can use interesting sports metaphors
and Randy language to describe it,
but let's just say it takes a certain amount of gusto
to do what some of those guys like Soros do
in terms of their big bets, doesn't it?
Lassa, it definitely does, yes,
and to keep riding at them when they've made a lot of money,
to not just fold and be satisfied,
but keep the bet on until it's delivered
its full potential.


# Chapter 40

These are the side-margin quotations from Chapter 18.
The mental infection known as political correctness is one of the most dangerous intellectual afflictions
ever to attack mankind.
It appeals to pseudo-intellectuals everywhere, since it evokes the strong streak of cowardice
notable among those wielding academic authority nowadays.
Any empty-headed student with a powerful voice can claim someone, never specified, will
be hurt by a hitherto harmless term, object, or activity, and be reasonably assured that
the dons and professors in charge will show a white feather and do as the student demands.
To a great extent, P.C. is the revenge of the resentful underdog.
Paul Johnson.
The term bubble should indicate a price that no reasonable future outcome can justify.
Cliff Asness.
The inability to predict outliers implies the inability to predict the course of history.
Naseem Taleb.
The more secretive or unjust an organization is, the more leaks induce fear and paranoia
in its leadership and planning coterie.
This must result in minimization of efficient internal communications mechanisms, an increase
in cognitive secrecy tax, and consequent system-wide cognitive decline resulting in decreased ability
to hold on to power as the environment demands adaptation.
Julian Assange.
You maniacs!
You blew it up!
Ah, damn you!
God damn you all to hell!
George Taylor.
Planet of the Apes, 1968.
Active management is a zero-sum game before cost, and the winners have to win at the
expense of the losers.
Eugene Fama.
Never underestimate the power of doing nothing.
Winnie the Pooh.
A reliable way to make people believe in falsehoods is frequent repetition, because
familiarity is not easily distinguished from truth.
Authoritarian institutions and marketeers have always known this fact.
Daniel Kahneman.
Thinking fast and slow.
A large fraction of traffic accidents are the type driver looked but failed to see.
Here drivers collide with pedestrians in plain view, with cars directly in front of
them, and even run into trains.
That's right.
Run into trains, not the other way around.
In such cases information from the world is entering the driver's eyes.
But at some point along the way this information is lost, causing the driver to lose
connection with reality.
They are looking, but they are not seeing.
Ronald A. Rensink.
How should we modify our beliefs in the light of additional information?
Do we cling to old assumptions long after they have become untenable or abandon them
too readily at the first whisper of doubt?
Bayesian reasoning promises to bring our views gradually in line with reality
and sync up with the universe.
The theorem itself can be stated simply.
Beginning with a provisional hypothesis about the world, there are of course no
other kinds, we assign to it an initial probability called the prior probability,
or simply the prior.
After actively collecting or happening upon some potentially relevant evidence, we
use Bayes' theorem to recalculate the probability of the hypothesis in light
of the new evidence.
This revised probability is called the posterior probability,
or simply the posterior.
Cross-validation means assessing not only how well a model fits the data it's
given, but how well it generalizes to data it hasn't seen.
Brian Christian.
As the years have unfolded and I have had experience of the seemingly magical
phenomenon of trends, my prejudice in favor of this unloved and unheralded
investment approach is hardened.
To a statistician, this is called a Bayesian philosophy.
You start with your prejudices and modify them in the light of experience.
I started with a weak belief and trend following because conventional
opinion said it couldn't work.
As I saw it work year after year, my belief in it has hardened.
David Harding.
When you're truly in the dark, the best-laid plans will be the simplest.
When our expectations are uncertain and the data are noisy, the best bet is to
paint with a broad brush to think in broad strokes.
Brian Christian.
I'm focusing on what can I do for our players so we can have a chance to win
the SEC Championship tomorrow.
That's really all I'm focusing on.
I've talked about, be where your feet are.
I'm right here, right now.
This is what's important and this is what we have to focus on.
Nick Saban, Alabama football coach.
Much as we bemoan the daily rat race, the fact that it's a race rather
than a fight is a key part of what sets us apart from the monkeys, the
chickens and, for that matter, the rats.
Brian Christian.


# Chapter 41

Section 3, Trend Following Research.
Academicians settled on volatility as the proxy for risk as a matter of convenience.
They needed a number for their calculations that was objective and could be ascertained
historically and extrapolated into the future.
Volatility fits the bill, and most of the other types of risk do not.
The problem with all of this, however, is that I just don't think volatility is the
risk most investors care about.
Rather than volatility, I think that people decline to make investments primarily because
they're worried about a loss of capital or an unacceptably low return.
To me, I need more upside potential because I'm afraid I could lose money makes an awful
lot more sense than I need more upside potential because I'm afraid the price may fluctuate.
No, I'm sure risk is, first and foremost, the likelihood of losing money.
I never know where connective tissue to make a case for trend following will be found.
It's always serendipity.
For example, Bob Seawright was a guest on my podcast, episode number 328, and he has
this great blog passage that I admire.
American virologist David Baltimore, who won the Nobel Prize for Medicine in 1975 for
his work on the genetic mechanisms of viruses, once told me that over the years, and especially
while he was president of Caltech, he received many manuscripts claiming to have solved some
great scientific problem or to have overthrown the existing scientific paradigm to provide
some grand theory of everything.
Most prominent scientists have drawers full of similar submissions, almost always from
people who work alone and outside the scientific community.
Unfortunately, none of these offerings has done anything remotely close to what was claimed,
and Dr. Baltimore offered some fascinating insight into why he thinks that's so.
At its best, he noted, good science is a collaborative community effort.
On the other hand, crackpots work alone.
Since I like to think of myself as no crackpot, this new section of trend following lays bare
in detail a collaborative and community effort.
Each of the following research papers adds new value and clarification to my main text
and interviews.
Chapter 19 A Multicentennial View of Trend Following
Alex Gracerman and Catherine Kaminsky
Cut short your losses and let your profits run on
David Ricardo, legendary political economist, source, The Great Metropolis, 1838
Trend Following is one of the classic investment styles.
This chapter tells the tale of trend following throughout the centuries.
Before delving into the highly detailed analysis and subsequent chapters, it is interesting
to discuss the paradigm of trend following from a qualitative historical perspective.
Although data-intensive, this approach is by no means a bulletproof, rigorous academic
exercise.
As with any long-term historical study, this analysis is fraught with assumptions, questions
of data reliability, and other biases.
Despite all of these concerns, history shapes our perspectives.
History is arguably highly subjective, yet it provides contextual relevance.
This chapter examines a simple characterization of trend following using roughly 800 years
of financial data.
Despite this rather naive characterization, and albeit crude set of financial data throughout
the centuries, the performance of cutting your losses and letting your profits run on
is robust enough to garner our attention.
The goal of this chapter is not to quote T statistics and make resolute assumptions based
on historical data.
The goal is to ask the question of whether the legendary David Ricardo, the famous Turtle
Traitors, and many successful trend followers throughout history are simply a matter of
over-embellished folklore or whether they may have had a point.
In recent times, trend following has garnered substantial attention for deftly performing
during a period of extreme market distress.
Trend following managers boasted returns of 15 to 80% during the abysmal period following
the credit crisis and infamous Lehman debacle.
Many have wondered if this performance is simply a fluke, or if the strategy would have performed
so well in other difficult periods in markets.
For example, how would a trend follower have performed during past crises like those experienced
in the Great Depression, the 1600s, or even the 1200s?
Given that this chapter engages in a historical discussion of trend following, it seems only
fitting to begin with a rather controversial and relatively spectacular historical event,
the Dutch tulip bubble of the early 1600s.
Historical prices for tulips are plotted in figure 19.1 in the supplemental PDF.
One common type of trend following strategy is a channel breakout strategy.
A channel breakout signal takes a long, short position when a signal breaks out of
a certain upper, lower boundary for a range of values.
Using a simple channel breakout signal, a trend following investor might have entered a long
position before November 25, 1636, and would have exited the trade by selling tulip bulbs
and eventually short selling, if that was even possible, around February 9, 1637.
A trend following investor simply follows the trend and cuts losses when the trend
seems to disappear.
In the case of tulips, a trend following investor might have ridden the bubble upward and sold
when prices started to fall.
This approach would have led to a sizable return rather than a handful of flower bulbs
and economic ruin.
Although it is one rather esoteric example, the tulip bulb example demonstrates that there
may be something robust or fundamental about the performance of a dynamic strategy like trend
following over the long run.
It is important to note that in this example, as in most financial markets, the exit decision
seems to be more important than the entry.
The importance of cutting your losses and taking profits seems to drive performance.
This is a concept that is revisited often throughout the course of this book.
Trend following strategies adapt with financial markets.
They find opportunities when market prices create trends due to many fundamental, technical,
and behavioral reasons.
As a group, trend followers profit from market divergence, riding trends in market prices
and cutting their losses across markets.
Examples of drivers that may create trends in markets include risk transfer or economic
rents being transferred from hedgers to speculators, the process of information dissemination
and behavioral biases, euphoria, panic, etc.
Despite the wide range of explanations, the underlying reasons behind market divergence
are of little consequence to a trend follower.
They seek simply to be there when opportunity arises.
Throughout history, opportunities do arise.
The robust performance of trend following over the past 800 years helps to historically
motivate this point, the tale of trend following, a historical study.
Although almost two centuries have passed since the advice of legendary political economist
David Ricardo, the same core principles of trend following have garnered significant attention
in modern times.
Using a unique data set dating back roughly 800 years, the performance of trend following
can be examined across a wide array of economic environments documenting low correlation with
traditional asset classes, positive skewness, and robust performance during crisis periods.
The performance of trend following has been discussed extensively in the applied and
academic literature.
Despite this, most of the data series that are examined are typically limited to actual
track records over several decades or futures cash data from the past century.
In this chapter, an 800-year data set is examined to extend and confirm previous studies.
To examine trend following over the long haul, monthly returns of 84 markets in equity,
fixed income, foreign exchange, and commodity markets are used as they became available
from the 1200s through to 2013.
There are several assumptions and approximations that are made to allow for a long-term analysis
of trend following.
For simplicity, an outline of assumptions and approximations, as well as a list of included
markets is included in the appendix.
Market behavior has varied substantially throughout the ages.
To correctly construct a representative data set through history, it is important to be
particularly mindful of dramatic economic developments.
This means that the data set should, as closely as possible, represent investment returns that
could have actually been investable.
For a specific example, from the early 17th century to the 1930s, the United Kingdom, UK,
the United States, US, and other major countries were committed to the gold standard.
During this period, the price of gold was essentially fixed.
As a result, gold must be removed from the sample of investable markets during this
particular time period.
As a second example, during most of the 19th century, capital gains represented an insignificant
portion of equity returns.
On average, US investors in the 19th century received only a 0.7% annualized capital gain,
but a 5.8% dividend per annum.
See figure 19.2 in the supplemental PDF.
In fact, up to the 1950s, stocks consistently paid a higher dividend yield than corporate
bonds.
As a consequence, total return indices must be used to represent equity market returns
over time.
Using return data collected from as far back as 1223, a representative trend following system
can be built for a period spanning roughly 800 years.
A representative trend following system represents the performance of following the trend throughout
the centuries in whatever markets might be available.
Although certain commodity markets, such as rice, date all the way back to around 1000
AD, the analysis begins in 1223 when there are at least a handful of available markets.
At any point in time to calculate whether a trend exists, the portfolio consists only
of the markets that have at least a 12-month history.
The trend following portfolio is assumed to be allowed to go both long and short.
Equity data is used for the analysis.
Based on a set of simple liquidity constraints, the portfolio is constructed of available markets.
Figure 19.3 in the supplemental PDF depicts the number of markets in the portfolio over
time.
The growth of futures markets has facilitated trend followers by making more markets available
for trading.
Return characteristics over the centuries.
Trend following requires dynamic allocation of capital to both long and short trends across
many different assets over time.
Figure 19.4 in the supplemental PDF plots the log scale performance of a trend following
strategy for roughly 800 years.
Over the entire historical period, from the 1300s to 2013, the representative trend following
system generates an annual return of 13%, with an annualized volatility of 11%.
This results in a sharp ratio of 1.16.
Many finance experts have argued for the reduction of risks in the long run or that one should
just simply buy and hold.
Trend following strategies dynamically adjust positions according to trends, making them
the counter to a buy and hold long-only strategy.
The difference between these two can give insight into the value added of active management
across asset classes.
Design sizes for both trend following and a buy and hold strategy are rebalanced on
a monthly basis to achieve equal risk.
In contrast with a buy and hold, the trend following system is free to go short.
For comparison, the buy and hold portfolio represents a diversified long-only portfolio
consisting of equities, bonds, and commodities.
Table 19.1 in the supplemental PDF displays performance statistics for the long-only buy
and hold portfolio and the representative trend following portfolio.
In terms of sharp ratio, the total performance of trend following over the past 800 years
is far superior.
This suggests that there may be a premium to active management and directional flexibility
in allowing short positions.
Given the spectacular outperformance of trend following over a long-only buy and hold
portfolio, it is only natural to take a closer look at various factors that may impact
this performance.
The role of interest rates, inflation, market divergence, and financial bubbles and crisis
are examined in closer detail in the following sections.
Table 19.1 performance statistics for buy and hold and trend following portfolios from
1223 to 2013.
Average return, annual.
Buy and hold portfolio, 4.8%.
Trend following portfolio, 13%.
For deviation, annual.
Buy and hold portfolio, 10.3%.
Trend following portfolio, 11.2%.
Sharp ratio, buy and hold portfolio, 0.47%.
Trend following portfolio, 1.16.
Interest rate regime dependence.
Because interest rates affect market participants' ability to borrow and lend as well as the
time value of money, they are an important factor to examine for dynamic strategies.
As interest rate regimes change, they can impact dynamic strategies in a plethora of
ways.
Interest rates are currently historically low, but interest rate regimes have varied substantially
across history.
Figure 19.5 in the supplemental PDF plots government bond yields over the past 700 years.
In this section, interest rate regimes are discussed from a 700-year perspective.
Since around 1300 AD, the median long-term bond yield has averaged around 5.8%.
Despite the intuitive, fundamental importance of interest rate regimes, the correlation
between the level of interest rates and trend following returns is only 0.14.
To see if different regimes have an impact on trend following performance, interest rate
levels can be divided into high and low.
A high interest rate regime can be defined by a year where the average yield is above
the median, and a low interest rate regime can be defined by a year where the average
yield is below the median.
Across both high and low interest rate regimes, on average, trend following performs better
during high interest rate regimes.
This can be seen in table 19.2 in the supplemental PDF.
Level 19.2, performance of trend following over different interest rate regimes from 1300
to 2013.
Average return, annual.
High interest rate, 15.5%.
Low interest rate, 10.6%.
Rising interest rate, 11.9%.
Falling interest rate, 14.4%.
Standard deviation, annual.
High interest rate, 9.9%.
Low interest rate, 12.2%.
Rising interest rate, 11.2%.
Falling interest rate, 11.1%.
Sharp ratio, high interest rate, 1.56%.
Low interest rate, 0.86%.
Rising interest rate, 1.06%.
Falling interest rate, 1.3%.
In practice, it is not only the level of interest rates, but also the relative movements
in interest rates that impacts markets.
To evaluate the impact of changes in interest rate, the yield differential from year end
to year end can be computed.
If the change over a time period is positive, negative, the year is defined as a rising,
falling interest rate year.
The correlation between the change in yield and trend following returns is close to zero,
suggesting that the difference in trend following performance during periods of either rising
or falling interest rates does not seem to be significant.
Inflationary environments.
Having examined the impact of interest rate environments, it is also interesting to discuss
inflation.
Since both the buy and hold and trend following strategies allocate capital across asset classes,
including commodities and currencies, buy and hold has only commodities, the inflationary
environment may play an important role over time.
Even outside this long-term historical study, in current times, threats of new, high inflationary
environments are rather pertinent.
In light of the current, stimulative monetary policies undertaken across the globe since
the financial crisis of 2008, it may be reasonable to anticipate that these policies
may eventually lead to higher inflation globally.
To examine the impact of different inflationary environments, using consumer price index and
producer price index for the United States and the United Kingdom, starting in 1720, a
composite inflation rate index can be constructed.
This composite inflation index is plotted in figure 19.6 in the supplemental PDF.
From 1720 to 2013, the composite inflation rate is above 5%, more than 25% of the time,
and above 10%, more than 13% of the time.
Inflation can be divided into low, less than 5%, medium, between 5% and 10%, and high, above
10%.
Performance can then be examined across different inflationary environments.
Despite the large differences in inflationary environments, trend following performs roughly
the same across all three types of inflationary environments, low, medium, and high.
The following table 19.3, also included in the supplemental PDF, summarizes the performance
of trend following across different inflationary regimes.
The robust performance for trend following across these inflationary regimes suggests
that the strategy seems to be able to adapt to different inflationary regimes.
Table 19.3, performance for trend following in different inflationary environments during
the period from 1720 to 2013, average return, annual, inflation, less than 5%, 10.4%, inflation
between 5% and 10%, 10.1%, inflation greater than 10%, 14.9%, standard deviation, annual,
inflation less than 5%, 12%, inflation between 5% and 10%, 9.9%, inflation greater than 10%,
14.6%, sharp ratio, inflation less than 5%, 0.87%, inflation between 5% and 10%, 1.02%,
inflation greater than 10%, 1.02%.
As an illustrative example, the Dutch tulip bubble of the 1600s was briefly discussed in the chapter
introduction. Over the centuries, numerous financial crises, or market bubbles, have plagued
financial markets. Based on its global impact and severity, the 1929 Wall Street Crash,
the notorious Black Monday of October 28, 1929, is another good example. Figure 19.7 in the
supplemental PDF plots the two-year period surrounding this date. Black Monday is the
spectacular day when the Dow Jones Industrial Index lost 13%. Figure 19.8 in the supplemental
PDF plots the cumulative performance of the representative trend following system over
the same period from Figure 19.7. During the month of October, 1929, a month where the Dow
Jones lost approximately half of its value, the representative trend following system
had a slightly positive return. Even more astonishing during the two years pre- and
post-crash, trend following earned a roughly 90% return with much of this return coming
post-crash during the start of the Great Depression. The positive performance of trend
following during crisis periods is not specific to the 1929 Wall Street Crash or the performance
during the Dutch Tulip Mania. In fact, the strategy seems to perform well during most
of the difficult periods throughout history. Taking a closer look at negative performance
periods for both fixed income and equity markets, the average performance for trend following
is plotted in Figure 19.9 in the supplemental PDF. In this, the conditional average returns
for trend following are positive for months when the equity index experienced negative
performance. For example, in the top panel of Figure 19.9, the average trend following
return is 0.2% for the 98 months when the equity portfolio return is between negative
4 and negative 6%. The bottom panel in Figure 19.9 shows a less consistent pattern with
reference to the bond index. The mean return for trend following is positive
for months when bond returns are negative. The performance of trend following seems to
be good even when equity and bonds perform at their worst. In addition to capturing trends
outside equity markets, a portion of trend following performance during down periods
can also come from the ability to short sell. For example, if short sales are restricted
in equities, trend following will have a long bias in equities and the performance
with and without the long bias during down months in equities can be discussed for the
past 300 years of the data set. Figure 19.10 in the supplemental PDF plots a comparison
of with and without long bias to equities for down periods in equities. This demonstrates
that a long equity bias reduces the performance of trend following during down equity months.
For a concrete example, for months when the equity index was down more than 10%, the
standard, balanced, trend following system returned 1.2% on average historically, while
the system restricted to long equities returned a slightly negative average return. Slightly
negative may seem disappointing, but putting this into the perspective of a pure long portfolio,
slightly negative pales in magnitude when compared with the unfortunate long-only equity investor
who lost roughly 14%. Market divergence. Markets move and adapt over time, periods
when markets move the most dramatically or periods of elevated market divergence are those
that provide trends suitable for trend following strategies. At the monthly level, the simplest
way to demonstrate this is to divide performance into quintiles, five equal buckets. These
buckets represent the worst equity return performance, one, to the best equity performance,
five. Figures 19.11 and 19.12 in the supplemental PDF plot the conditional performance of trend
following for each of the five quintiles. Figure 19.11 plots the past 100 years of
the dataset divided into two sub periods, 1913 to 1962 and 1963 to 2013. Figure 19.12
divides these two periods into two further 25-year sub periods, 1913 to 1937, 1938 to
1962, 1963 to 1987, and 1988 to 2013. These figures demonstrate a phenomenon practitioners
often call the CTA smile. Trend following returns tend to perform well during moments
when market divergence is the largest. For example, in the four 25-year time periods,
the first period, which includes the Great Depression and the 1929 Wall Street Crash,
exhibits the well-known CTA smile. The best performance is during the best and worst
moments for equities. The period after the Great Depression is a period when the best
periods for equities were the best for a trend following strategy. The third time
period also exhibits the smile. Finally, the past 25 years, a time period including the
credit crisis and the tech bubble and other crises, is a time period when the most opportunities
have come during the worst periods for equity markets. The convex performance, performance
on both extremes of trend following, demonstrates the role of divergence or dislocation in
markets for good or for bad. Because the CTA smile demonstrates a convex relationship
between trend following and equity markets, it is not surprising that many investors label
trend following as long volatility. Although trend followers perform well at the extremes,
not all volatility is created equal. If volatility increased and there were trends
across markets, trend followers are long volatility. If volatility increases and there are no
trends, trend followers may be flat or even look like short volatility. Put more simply,
trend following is long market divergence. Market divergence and volatility are related,
but they are by no means the same. Risk characteristics over the centuries.
The principle of let profits run and cut short your losses enables trend following to achieve
a desirable risk profile with more small losses as opposed to large drawdowns. In statistical
terms, trend following returns exhibit positive skewness. Over the roughly 800 year period,
the skewness for monthly returns is 0.3. Positive skewness indicates that the chance for a left
tail risk or large drawdowns and trend following is relatively small. This characteristic is
somewhat unique to trend following. Most asset classes and strategies exhibit negative
skewness. In addition to positive skewness for the same roughly 800 year period,
trend following has low correlation with traditional asset classes. To quantify
the relationship between trend following and the traditional asset classes, a simple equity
index and a simple bond index can be constructed by averaging the monthly returns of several global
equity indices and bond markets. The overall correlation between the monthly returns of the
representative trend following system and the equity index is 0.05 and 0.09 with a bond index.
Given that these correlations are a proxy for the relationship between trend following with
bond and equity markets, it is not surprising that the betas for trend following with both
equity and fixed income are generally extremely low. Outside of skewness and correlation, drawdown
is another important concern for most trend following investors. Figure 19.3 in the supplemental
PDF plots the maximum drawdown and the average of the five largest drawdowns for the representative
trend following system relative to the corresponding largest drawdowns of the buy and hold portfolio.
Drawdowns for trend following are significantly lower relative to the buy and hold portfolio.
The maximum drawdown for trend following is approximately 25% lower than the maximum drawdown
of the buy and hold portfolio. The average of the top five drawdowns for trend following is
roughly a third lower than the average of the top five drawdowns for buy and hold.
As shown in figure 19.14 in the supplemental PDF, the drawdown durations for trend following
are also substantially shorter than those experienced by the buy and hold portfolio.
During the past 700 years, when compared to the buy and hold portfolio, the duration of the
longest drawdown and the average duration of the longest five drawdowns are 90% and 80% shorter,
respectively. The superior drawdown profile of trend following is related to the positive
skewness of returns and the negative serial correlation.
Portfolio benefits over the centuries. The previous sections discuss the return
and risk characteristics of trend following over the centuries. Over an extensive 800-year
period, trend following portfolios exhibit robust performance with a sharp ratio of 1.16.
The strategy has low correlation with traditional asset classes, interest rate regimes, and inflation.
In addition, performance during crisis periods is positive across the entire sample.
A rough look across quintiles and equity markets demonstrates that divergence in market prices
is a driver of trend following performance. The strategy also exhibits positive skewness
and smaller drawdowns than buy and hold strategies. All of these characteristics make
trend following a good candidate to diversify traditional portfolios.
During the period beginning in the 1690s up until 2013, the equity index achieves a reasonably
high sharp ratio of 0.7. For an even longer period, beginning in the 1300s up until 2013,
the bond index also has a positive sharp ratio. Despite the fact that both indices are positive,
the sharp ratio for trend following is still much higher than a combined buy and hold strategy.
This suggests that adding some trend following may improve upon a buy and hold strategy.
Table 19.4 in the supplemental PDF displays the portfolio benefits created by combining
the buy and hold portfolio, incorporating either the equity or bond indices, with an equal allocation
to the representative trend following portfolio. The start dates for this analysis correspond to
the first availability of data for equity and bond markets. In an equal risk allocated portfolio,
the performance improvement over both the traditional equity and bond portfolios
is relatively substantial. Adding trend following to a traditional equity or bond portfolio improves
the sharp ratio of both indices. To examine this from the perspective of a traditional
investment portfolio, trend following can be added to a typical 60-40 equity bond portfolio.
For example, a combined portfolio can be constructed such that it consists of 80% of
a traditional 60-40 portfolio and 20% trend following. In this case, this translates to
48% of equities, 32% of bonds, and 20% of trend following. Figure 19.15 in the supplemental PDF
plots the performance in terms of sharp ratio for the individual portfolios,
the trend following portfolio, the 60-40 portfolio, and the combined 60-40 and trend
following portfolio. During the period of 1695 to 2013, a 20% allocation to trend following is
able to boost the sharp ratio of a 60-40 portfolio from 1 to 1.2.
Summary
The use of trend following as an alternative investment strategy has certainly grown over
the past 30 years. Using roughly 800 years of market data, trend following can be viewed from
a long-term perspective. Over the centuries, empirically, trend following has provided
distinctly positive returns, a high sharp ratio, as well as low correlation with traditional
asset classes, inflation, and interest rate regimes. The strategy provides consistently
positive performance during crisis periods, and the performance seems to be linked to
divergence across markets. From a portfolio perspective, the combination of trend following
with traditional portfolios, such as a 60-40 portfolio, significantly improves risk-adjusted
performance. Appendix
Included markets and relevant assumptions
For a complete list of included markets, please see the supplemental PDF.
Assumptions and approximations
There are several assumptions and approximations which are made to allow for a long-term analysis
of trend following. For simplicity, these are listed as follows.
1. Futures prices first. When available, futures market returns are used.
2. Equity and fixed income. Prior to the availability of futures data,
index returns are used for both equity and fixed income markets. Total returns are
constructed using the appropriate short-term interest rates.
3. FX. For currency markets, spot price returns are adjusted by the interest rates
differential of the two relevant currencies. When interest rates are not available,
spot returns for currencies are used without adjustment.
4. Commodities. For commodities in the absence of futures price data,
cash market returns are used. 5. Excess cash return.
The interest earned on collateral and cash returns is excluded from this analysis.


# Chapter 42

Chapter 20. Two centuries of trend following. Eva Lumpierre, Cyril de Rimbler, Philip Seger,
Mark Potters, and Jean-Philippe Bouchot. Capital Fund Management.
We established the existence of anomalous excess returns based on trend-following strategies
across four asset classes. Commodities, currencies, stock indexes, and bonds. And over very long
timescales. We use for our studies both futures time series that have existed since 1960 and spot
time series that allow us to go back to 1800 on commodities and indexes. The overall T statistic
of the excess returns is approximately equal to 5 since 1960 and approximately equal to 10 since
1800 after accounting for the overall upward drift of these markets. The effect is very stable
across both time and asset classes. It makes the existence of trends one of the most statistically
significant anomalies in financial markets. When analyzing the trend-following signal further,
we find a clear saturation effect for large signals suggesting that fundamentalist traders
do not attempt to resist weak trends but step in when their own signal becomes strong enough.
Finally, we study the performance of trend following in the recent period. We find no
sign of a statistical degradation of long trends whereas shorter trends have significantly withered.
Introduction. Are markets efficient in the sense that all public information is included in current
prices? If this were so, price changes would be totally unpredictable in the sense that no
systematic excess return based on public information could be achievable. After decades of euphoria
and economics departments, serious doubts were raised by behavioral economists who established
a long series of pricing anomalies. The most famous of these anomalies, and arguably the
most difficult to sweep under the rug, is the so-called excess volatility puzzle unveiled by
Schiller and others. Strangely or wisely, the 2013 Nobel Committee decided not to take sides
and declared that markets are indeed efficient, as claimed by laureate Eugene Fama, but that
the theory actually makes little sense, as argued by Robert Schiller, who shared the same prize.
In the list of long-known anomalies, the existence of trends plays a special role.
First, because trending is the exact opposite of the mechanisms that should ensure that
markets are efficient, that is, reversion forces that drive prices back to the purported
fundamental value. Second, because persistent returns validate a dramatically simple strategy,
trend following, which amounts to buying when the price goes up and selling when it goes down.
Simple as it may be, this strategy is at the heart of the activity of commodity trading
advisors, an industry that now manages, as of 2013 fourth quarter, no less than $325 billion,
representing about 16 percent of the total assets of the hedge fund industry and accounting
for several percent of the daily activity of futures markets. These numbers are by no means
small and make it hard for efficient market enthusiasts to dismiss this anomaly as economically
irrelevant. The strategy is furthermore deployed over a wide range of instruments,
indexes, bonds, commodities, currencies, etc., with positive reported performance over
long periods, suggesting that the anomaly is to a large extent universal, both across
epics and asset classes. This reveals an extremely persistent universal bias and the
behavior of investors who appear to hold extrapolative expectations, as argued in
many papers coming from different strands of the academic literature. Many academic studies
have already investigated this trend anomaly on a wide range of assets and have convincingly
established its statistical significance in the last few decades. Recently, this time
horizon has been extended to a hundred years by Hearst and others, and the effect still exists
unabated. The aim of the present paper is to extend the time horizon even further to
two hundred years, as far in the past as we have been able to go in terms of data.
We find that the amplitude of the effect has been remarkably steady over two centuries. This
also allows us to assess the recent weakening of the effect, as testified by the relatively
poor performance of CTAs over the last five years. We show that the very recent past
is fully compatible with a statistical fluctuation. Although we cannot exclude that this recent
period is a precursor of the end of trends, we argue theoretically that this is an unlikely
scenario. We give several mechanisms that could explain the existence and persistence
of these trends throughout history. Note that trends exist not only for market
factors such as indexes, bonds and currencies, but also cross-sectionally in stock markets.
The so-called momentum anomaly consists in buying the past winners and selling the past
losers in a market-neutral way, again with a high statistical significance across many
decades and different geographical zones. Although interesting in its own right, and vindicating
the hypothesis that trend following is universal, we will not study this particular aspect of
trend following in the present paper. The outline of the paper is as follows. First,
we define the trend following indicator used for this study and test its statistical significance
on available futures data. We start with futures, since they are the preferred instrument
of trend followers and finance. Also, their prices are unambiguously defined by transparent
market trades and not the result of a proprietary computation. Next, we carefully examine, for each
asset class, how the available time series can be extended as far in the past as possible.
We then present our results over two centuries and we show how exceptionally stable long
trends have been. We examine more deeply the linearity of the signal and find that
the trend predictability saturates for large values of the signal, which is needed for
the long-term stability of markets. Last, we discuss the significance of the recent
performance of the trend in light of this long-term simulation. Trend following on futures
since 1960. Measuring trends. We choose to define our trend indicator in a way similar to
simulating a constant risk trading strategy without costs. More precisely, we first define
the reference price level at time t, p sub n and t as an exponential moving average of
past prices, excluding p t itself, with a decay rate equal to n months. Long simulations
can often only be performed on monthly data, so we use monthly closes. The signal s sub
n of t, at the beginning of month t, is constructed as s sub n of t equals the quotient
of actual price level p of t minus 1 minus reference price level, p sub n, and t minus
1 divided by volatility sigma sub n of t minus 1, where the volatility sigma sub n is equal
to the exponential moving average of the absolute monthly price changes with a decay rate equal
to n months. The average strength of the trend is then measured as the statistical significance
of fictitious profits and losses, p and l's, of a risk-managed strategy that buys or sells,
depending on the sign s sub n, a quantity plus and minus the inverse of sigma sub n,
of the underlying contract alpha to the power of 6. Average strength of a trend, function
q sub n to the power of alpha of time t, equals the sum of statistical significance,
sigma sub n of t prime times the quotient of p of t prime minus 1 minus p of t prime
divided by sigma sub n of t prime minus 1. These two equations, 2.1 and 2.2, may also
be found in the supplemental PDF. In the rest of the paper, we will focus on the
choice n equals 5 months, although the dependence on n will be discussed. Of course, different
implementations can be proposed. However, the general conclusions are extremely robust
against changes to the statistical test or to the implemented strategy.
In the following, we will define the Sharpe ratio of the p and l as its average return
divided by its volatility, both annualized. Since the p and l does not include interest
earned on the capital and futures are self-financed instruments, we do not need to subtract the
risk-free rate to compute the Sharpe ratio. The t-statistic of the p and l, that is, the
fact that the average return is significantly different from zero, is therefore given by
the Sharpe ratio times the square root of n, where n is the number of years over which
the strategy is active. We will also define the drift mu of a time series as the average
daily return of the corresponding instrument, which would be the p and l of the long-only
strategy if financing costs were to be neglected.
The pool of assets. Since we wish to prove that trend following
is a universal effect, not restricted to any one asset, we would like to test this signal
on as large a pool as possible. This is also important in practice, since diversification
plays an important role in the performance of CTAs. However, since the purpose of this
paper is to backtest the trend on a very large history, we voluntarily limit ourselves
to the contracts for which a long data set is available. This naturally makes the inclusion
of emerging markets more difficult. Therefore, for indexes, bonds, and currencies,
we only consider the following seven countries – Australia, Canada, Germany, Japan, Switzerland,
the United Kingdom, and the United States. We believe the results of this section
would only be improved by the choice of a wider pool.
We also need to select a pool of commodities. In order to have a well-balanced pool, we
chose the following seven representative contracts – crude oil, Henry Hub Natural
Gas, corn, wheat, sugar, live cattle, and copper. In summary, we have a pool made up
of seven commodity contracts, seven 10-year bond contracts, seven stock index contracts,
and six currency contracts. All the data used in the current paper comes from Global
Financial Data – GFD. The Results
Our history of futures starts in 1960, mostly with commodities. As we can see from Figure
20.1 in the supplemental PDF, the aggregated performance sum of alpha terms of all the average
strengths sub n to the power of alpha of t looks well distributed in time, with an
overall t statistic of 5.9, which is highly significant. The Sharpe ratio and t statistic
are only weakly dependent on n. However, we might argue that this comes from the trivial
fact that there is an overall drift mu in most of these time series. For example, the
stock market tends to go up over time. It is therefore desirable to remove this long
bias by focusing on the residual of the trend following P and L when the beta with the
long-only strategy has been factored in. In fact, the correlation is found to be
rather small, since the trend following P and L and the long-only strategy are only
plus 15% correlated. Still, this correlation slightly decreases the overall t statistic
of the trend following performance to 5.0. In order to assess the significance of the
above result, we break it down into different sectors and decades. As shown in Tables 20.2
and 20.3 in the supplemental PDF, the t statistic of the trend following strategy
is above 2.1 for all sectors and all decades, and above 1.6 when debiased from the drift
mu. Therefore, the performance shown in Figure 20.1 is well distributed across all sectors
and periods, which strongly supports the claim that the existence of trends in financial markets
is indeed universal. One issue, though, is that our history of futures only goes back
50 years or so, and the first 10 years of those 50 is only made up of commodities.
In order to test the stability and universality of the effect, it is desirable to extend the
time series to go back further in the past in order to span many economic cycles and
different macro-environments. This is the goal of the next section, which provides a
convincing confirmation of the results based on futures. Extending the time series, a
case-by-case approach. We now try to find proxies for the futures
time series that are reasonably correlated with the actual futures prices of the recent
period, but allow us to go back in the past a lot further. Natural candidates are spot
prices on currencies, stock indexes and commodities, and government rates for bonds. We shall examine
each sector independently. Before doing so, however, we should mention other important
restrictions on the use of the historical data. First, we expect trends to develop only
on freely traded instruments, where price evolution is not distorted by state interventions.
Also, we require a certain amount of liquidity in order to have meaningful prices. These
two conditions, free floating and liquid assets, will actually limit us when we look back in the
distant past. Currencies. The futures time series goes back to 1973. In the previous
period, 1944-71, the monetary system operated under the rules set out in the Bretton Woods
agreements. According to these international treaties, the exchange rates were pegged to
the US dollar within a 1% margin, which remained the only currency that was convertible into gold
at a fixed rate. Therefore, no trend can be expected on these time series, where prices
are limited to a small band around a reference value. Prior to this, the dominance system was
the gold standard. In this regime, the international value of a currency was determined by a fixed
relationship with gold. Gold, in turn, was used to settle international accounts. In
this regime, we also cannot expect trends to develop, since the value of the currency
is essentially fixed by its conversion rate with gold. In the 1930s, many countries dropped
out of this system, massively devaluing in a desperate attempt to manage the consequences
of the Great Depression, the beggar thy neighbor policy. This also led to massively managed
currencies with little hope of finding any genuine trending behavior. All in all, therefore,
it seems unlikely that we can find a free-floating substitute for our futures time series on
foreign exchange prior to 1973. Government rates. Government debt and default has been
around for centuries, but in order to observe a trend on interest rates, we need a liquid
secondary market on which the debt can be exchanged at all times. This is a highly
non-trivial feature for this market. Indeed, throughout most of the available history,
government debt has been used mostly as a way to finance extraordinary liabilities,
such as wars. In other periods of history, debt levels gradually reduced as the principles
were repaid or washed away by growth, as debt levels are quoted relative to GDP.
As a typical example, we can see in Figure 20.2 that the U.S. debt inherited from the
War of Independence fell to practically zero in 1835-36 during the Jackson presidency. There
is another spike in 1860-65 during the American Civil War, which then gets gradually washed away
by growth. We have to wait until World War I to see a significant increase in debt,
which then persists until today. Apart from Australia, whose debt has grown at a roughly
constant rate, and Japan, whose turning point is around 1905 during the Russo-Japanese War,
the situation in all other countries is similar to that of the United States. From this point
onward, the debt has never been repaid in its totality in any of the countries we consider
in this study, and has mostly been rolled over from one bond issuance to the next.
Another more subtle point can explain the emergence of a stable debt market. At the beginning of the
20th century, the monetary policy, in its most straightforward sense, the power to print money,
was separated from the executive instances and attributed to central banks, supposedly independent
of the political power. See Figure 20.4 and the supplemental PDF. This move increased the
confidence in the national debt of these countries and helped boost subsequent debt levels.
All of this leads us to the conclusion that the bond market before 1918 was not developed
enough to be considered as freely traded and liquid. Therefore, we start our interest rate
time series in 1918. We should note as well that we exclude from the time series World War II
and the immediate post-war period in Japan and Germany, where the economy was heavily managed,
therefore leading to price distortions. Indexes and Commodities. For these sectors,
the situation is more straightforward. Stocks and commodities were actively priced throughout
the 19th century, so it is relatively easy to get clean, well-defined prices. As we can see
from tables 20.5 and 20.6 in the supplemental PDF, we can characterize trend following strategies
for over two centuries on some of these time series. Apart from some episodes that we excluded,
such as World War II in Germany and Japan, where the stock market was closed, or the period through
which the price of crude oil was fixed in the second half of the 20th century, the time series
are of reasonably good quality. That is, prices are actually moving, no gaps, and there are no
major outliers. Validating the proxies. We now want to check that the time series selected
above, essentially based on spot data on 10-year government bonds, indexes, and commodities, yield
results that are very similar to those we obtained with futures. This will validate our proxies
and allow us to extend, in the following section, our simulations to the pre-1960 period.
In figure 20.3 in the supplemental PDF, we show a comparison of the trend applied to
futures prices and to spot prices in the period of overlapping coverage between the two data
sets. From 1982 onward, we have futures in all four sectors, and the correlation is
measured to be 91%, which we consider to be acceptably high. We show the correlations
per sector calculated since 1960 in table 20.7 in the supplemental PDF, and observe that
the correlation remains high for indexes and bonds, but is lower for commodities, with a
correlation of 65%. We know that the difference between the spot and futures prices is the
so-called cost of carry, which is absent for the spot data, this additional term being
specially significant and volatile for commodities. We find, however, that the level of correlation
is sufficiently high to render the results meaningful. In any case, the addition of the
cost of carry can only improve the performance of the trend on futures, and any conclusion
regarding trends on spot data will be further confirmed by the use of futures data. We
therefore feel justified in using the spot data to build statistics over a long history.
We believe that the performance will be close to, and in any case no worse than, that
on real futures, in particular because average financing costs are small, as illustrated
by figure 20.3 in the supplemental PDF, trend over two centuries, results of the full simulation.
The performance of the trend following strategy defined by equation 2.2 in the supplemental
PDF over the entire time period, two centuries, is shown in figure 20.4, seen in the supplemental
PDF. It is visually clear that the performance is highly significant. This is confirmed by
the value of the T statistic, which is found to be above 10 and 9.8 when debiased from the
long-only contribution, that is, the T statistic of excess returns. For comparison, the T statistic
of the drift mu of the same time series is 4.6. As documented in table 20.8 in the
supplemental PDF, the performance is furthermore significant on each individual sector with a T
statistic of 2.9 or higher and 2.7 or higher when the long bias is removed. Note that the debiased
T statistic of the trend is in fact higher than the T statistic of the long-only strategy,
with the exception of commodities where it is slightly worse, 3.1 versus 4.5.
The performance is also remarkably constant over two centuries. This is obvious from figure 20.4,
and we report the T statistic for different periods in table 20.9 in the supplemental PDF.
The overall performance is in fact positive over every decade in the sample. The increase
in performance in the second half of the simulation probably comes from the fact that we
have more and more products as time goes on. Indeed, government yields and currencies both
start well into the 20th century. A closer look at the signal.
It is interesting to delve deeper into the predictability of the trend following signal,
S sub N of T, defined in equation 2.1. Instead of computing the P and L given by equation 2.2,
we can instead look at the scatterplot of delta T plus P of T plus 1 minus P of T as a function
of S sub N of T. This gives a noisy blob of points with, to the naked eye, very little structure.
However, a regression line through the points leads to a statistically significant slope.
That is, delta T equals A plus B times S sub N of T plus Xi of T, where A equals a value
between zero and 0.018, give or take 0.003, B equals a value between zero and 0.038, give
or take 0.002, and Xi is a noise term. The fact that A is greater than zero is equivalent
to saying that the long-only strategy is, on average, profitable, whereas B greater than
0 indicates the presence of trends. However, it is not a priori obvious that we should expect
a linear relation between delta and S sub N. Trying a cubic regression gives a very small
coefficient for the S sub N squared term and a clearly negative coefficient for the S sub
N cubed term, indicating that strong signals tend to flatten, as suggested by a running
average of the signal shown in figure 20.5 in the supplemental PDF. However, the strong
mean reversion that such a negative cubic contribution would predict for large values
of SN is suspicious. We have therefore instead tried to model a nonlinear saturation through
a hyperbolic tangent, see figure 20.5 in the supplemental PDF. Delta T equals A plus
B times S star times the hyperbolic tangent of S sub N of T divided by S star plus Xi of T,
which recovers the linear regime when absolute value of S sub N is strictly less than S star
but saturates for the absolute value of S sub N greater than S star. This nonlinear fit is found
to be better than the cubic fit as well as the linear fit as it prefers a finite value S star
is approximately 0.89 and now B is approximately 0.075. A linear fit is recovered in the limits
S star goes to infinity. Interestingly, the values of A, B, and S star hardly change when N increases
from 2.5 months to 10 months. A closer look at the recent performance. The plateau in the
performance of the trend over the last few years, see figure 20.6 in the supplemental PDF,
has received a lot of attention from CTA managers and investors. Among other explanations,
the overcrowdedness of the strategy has frequently been evoked to explain this
relatively poor performance. We now want to reconsider these conclusions in the context
of the long-term simulation. First, it should not come as a surprise that a strategy with a
historical sharp ratio below 0.8 shows relatively long drawdowns. In fact, the typical duration of
a drawdown is given by 1 equals the square of the sharp ratio in years for a strategy of
sharp ratio S. This means that for a sharp of 0.7 typical drawdowns last two years while
drawdowns for four years are not exceptional. To see how significant the recent performance is,
we have plotted in figure 20.7, see the supplemental PDF, the average P&L between
time over 10 years and time t. We find that although we are currently slightly below the
historical average, this is by no means an exceptional situation. A much worse performance
was in fact observed in the 1940s. Figure 20.7 also reveals that the 10-year performance of trend
following has, as noted above, never been negative in two centuries, which is again a strong
indication that trend following is ingrained in the evolution of prices. The above conclusion
is however only valid for long-term trends with a horizon of several months. Much shorter trends,
say over three days, has significantly decayed since 1990, see figure 20.8 in the supplemental
PDF. This is perfectly in line with a recent study by the Winton Group. We will now propose
a tentative interpretation of these observations. Interpretation. The above results show that
long-term trends exist across all asset classes and are stable in time. As mentioned in the
introduction, trending behavior is also observed in the idiosyncratic component of individual
stocks. What can explain such universal persistent behavior of prices? We can find two, possibly
complementary, broad families of interpretation in the literature. One explanation assumes
that agents underreact to news and only progressively include the available information in prices.
An example of this could be an announced sequence of rate increases by a central bank over
several months, which is not immediately reflected in bond prices because market
participants tend to only believe in what they see and are slow to change their previous
expectations. Conservatism bias. In general, changes of policy for governments, central banks,
or indeed companies are slow and progressive. If correctly anticipated, prices should immediately
reflect the endpoint of the policy change. Otherwise, prices will progressively follow
the announced changes, and this inertia leads to trends. Another distinct mechanism is that
market participants' expectations are directly influenced by past trends. Positive returns make
them optimistic about future prices and vice versa. These extrapolative expectations are
supported by learning to predict experiments in artificial markets, which show that linear
extrapolation is a strongly anchoring strategy. In a complex world where information is difficult
to decipher, trend following, together with herding, is one of the fast and frugal heuristics
that most people are tempted to use. Survey data also points strongly in this direction.
Studies of agent-based models, in fact, show that the imbalance between trend following
and fundamental pricing is crucial in accounting for some of the stylized facts of financial
markets, such as fat tails and volatility clustering. Clearly, the perception of trends
can lead to positive feedback trading, which reinforces the existence of trends rather than
making them disappear. On this last point, we note that the existence of trends far predates
the explosion of assets managed by CTAs. The data shown above suggests that CTAs have
neither substantially increased nor substantially reduced the strength of long-term trends in
major financial markets, while the degradation in recent performance, although not statistically
significant, might be attributed to overcrowding of trend strategies. It is not entirely clear
how this would happen in the extrapolative expectation scenario, which tends to be self-reinforcing.
If, on the other hand, under-reaction is the main driver of trends in financial markets,
we may indeed see trends disappear as market participants better anticipate long-term policy
changes or, indeed, policymakers become more easily predictable. Still, the empirical evidence
supporting a behavioral trend following propensity seems to us strong enough to advocate extrapolative
expectations over under-reactions. It would be interesting to build a detailed behavioral
model that explains why the trending signal saturates at high values as evidenced in figure
20.5. One plausible interpretation is that, when prices become more obviously out of line,
fundamentalist traders start stepping in, and this mitigates the impact of trend followers
who are still lured in by the strong trend. Conclusions
In this study, we established the existence of anomalous excess returns based on trend-following
strategies across all asset classes and over very long time scales. We first studied futures
as is customary, then spot data that allows us to go far back in history. We carefully justified
our procedure, in particular by comparing the results on spot data in the recent period,
which shows a strong correlation with futures with very similar drifts.
The only sector where we found no way to extend the history is for foreign exchange,
since the idea of a free-floating currency is a rather recent one. We found that the trend has
been a very persistent feature of all the financial markets we looked at. The overall
tea statistic of the excess returns has been around 10 since 1800, after accounting for the
long-only bias. Furthermore, the excess returns associated to trends cannot be associated to any
sort of risk premium. The effect is very stable, across both time and asset classes. It makes the
existence of trends one of the most statistically significant anomalies in financial markets.
When analyzing the trend-following signal further, we found a clear saturation effect for large
signals, suggesting that fundamentalist traders do not attempt to resist weak trends but might step
in when their own signal becomes strong enough. We investigated the statistical significance of the
recent mediocre performance of the trend and found that this was actually in line with a
long historical backtest. Therefore, the suggestion that long-term trend-following has
become overcrowded is not borne out by our analysis and is compatible with our estimate
that CTAs only contribute a few percent of market volumes. Still, the understanding of
the behavioral causes of trends, and in particular the relative role of extrapolative expectations,
versus under-reaction or conservative biases, would allow us to form an educated opinion on
the long-term viability of trend-following strategies. It is actually not obvious how
crowdedness would deteriorate trend-following strategies, since more trend-following should
speed up trends as managers attempt to front-run the competition. Figure 20.8 in the supplemental
PDF, however, adds to the conundrum by showing that faster trends have actually progressively
disappeared in recent years without ever showing an intermediate period where they strengthened.
Coming up with a plausible mechanism that explains how these fast trends have disappeared
would be highly valuable in understanding the fate of trends in financial markets.


# Chapter 43

Chapter 21, Trend Following.
Quality, not quantity.
Anthony Todd and Martin Luke.
Aspect Capital.
Overview.
Investors typically seek to exploit
the power of diversification.
It is possible to improve risk adjusted returns
simply by combining different diversifying strategies
of similar risk and return.
In this paper, we ask if this approach
should be applied to trend following models.
There are many different methods
of creating trend following models,
and we consider a wide range of common approaches
to investigate whether the combination
of several of these models can lead to improved performance,
or whether there is a better way to construct
a trend following system.
We show how different trend following models,
when applied to the same portfolio of markets,
and operated at similar speeds,
generally have high correlations with each other,
and thus offer limited diversification benefits.
We also demonstrate that a better approach
to trend following is to apply a holistic methodology
which aims to capture the most effective features
of many different techniques,
and to integrate them into a single, high-caliber model.
We demonstrate that Aspect's own trend following model,
which has evolved over many years
through innovative research that essentially combines
the benefits of multiple different approaches,
is such an example.
Introduction to different trend following models.
In this paper, we consider a group
of 13 different trend following models.
All the models have been applied to the same portfolio
of 146 markets, and have been parameterized,
such that they all capture medium-term trends
of approximately two to three months in duration,
and generate the same levels
of annualized return volatility.
For the purposes of this analysis,
we do not include the impact of trading costs,
as we are purely focused on the difference
between various trend following approaches,
and they will be broadly equivalent across the set
of consistent timescale models.
The origins of these 13 models are varied,
but all are in the public domain.
They include models popularized
by the turtle traders of the 1980s,
models that have been regularly cited in recent years
in academic literature,
and a number of other well-known trend capture techniques,
including look back and look forward windows,
moving average approaches, technical indicators,
and other statistical methods.
Figure 21.1 in the supplemental PDF
compares the performance of all these models
over the period January 1999 to June 2016,
and figure 21.2 in the supplemental PDF
compares the model's information ratios,
a measure of return for a given level of risk.
The performance of the different models
is generally fairly consistent,
and the average information ratio achieved in simulation
by the 13 trend following models is 0.95,
with the maximum being 1.1.
Explanations of all abbreviations used in the figures
can be found in the appendix of this chapter.
Diversification between different trend following models.
When different diversifying strategies
of similar risk and return are combined,
better risk-adjusted returns might be expected
through the lower volatility achieved
as a result of the diversification.
In this section, we consider whether the combination
of different trend following models
can lead to improved performance.
While the 13 models we've introduced
represent a broad range of different approaches
to systematic medium-term trend capture,
we find that they are highly correlated to each other.
Figure 21.3 in the supplemental PDF
shows the correlations between the 13 models,
again, over the January 1999 to June 2016 period.
The lowest correlation we see is 67%
between the MOP and Turtle ATR models,
while the average correlation between models is 89%.
As a first step in investigating
whether a combination of these models is preferable,
Figure 21.4 in the supplemental PDF
shows the performance of a strategy
which is a simple average of all the 13 models
obtained by blending the output returns
from each on a daily basis
and adjusting for the slight reduction
in volatility that results.
We see from Figure 21.4 that the performance
of the averaged strategy is comparable
to the performance of some of the individual models.
In addition, its information ratio is one
which is only slightly better than the average
of the individual model information ratios of 0.95.
As a consequence of the high levels of correlation
between the individual models,
the diversification benefit that arises
from combining them is only slight.
To investigate this further,
we consider all possible equally weighted combinations
of the 13 models under consideration
and determine the average risk-adjusted return
as the number of models combined is varied.
We start with just one model,
of which there are 13 to choose from,
and then in turn consider combinations of two,
three, four, et cetera,
up to the final combination of 13 models.
Significantly, Figure 21.5 in the supplemental PDF
shows that there is very little diversification benefit
to be had from combining models
as the impact on average risk-adjusted performance
is insignificant.
Aspects approach to trend following.
The results of the previous section suggest that,
due to the high levels of correlation,
diversification between different trend following models
is illusory.
Instead, Aspect takes the holistic view
that if the goal is to maximize performance
from trend following,
it is better to build the best possible
single trend following model
that integrates distinguishing features
of many different approaches.
Aspect's trend following model has been developed
over many years of rigorous scientific
and hypothesis-based research,
incorporating features of multiple different approaches
in a carefully considered, coherent framework.
Aspect's trend following model referenced in this paper
is that which has an allocation of 80%
within the Aspect diversified program.
One of the major research innovations in Aspect's history
was its move in 2005
from a multi-model approach to trend following
to a single holistic approach.
As an example of an Aspect innovation,
capitalizing on a feature of one family of models,
some breakout models use methods to calculate
a high and low range for their channels,
but do so with a coarse binary signal construction.
This observation led us to research more thoroughly
the usefulness of considering channel data
as part of our data processing stage
and has enabled us to refine the way
our trend following model deals with specific market moves.
This approach has enabled us to make the most
of the diversifying features of breakout models,
while at the same time,
avoiding its less desirable limiting features,
that is, its coarse binary signal construction.
Our research has led to a number of key trend
following innovations over the years,
which fall into three main stages
within our single holistic model.
Data processing, this stage deals with the way
in which market data is processed
in order to create the most appropriate data series
for the trend measurement stage.
Trend measurement, this stage filters the process data
in order to measure the strength and direction of trends.
Position mapping, having determined
appropriate trend measurements,
these are then mapped to appropriately sized positions.
Figure 21.6 in the supplemental PDF
shows the performance of a base trend following model
built by Aspect, which still benefits
from many of Aspect's portfolio construction,
position sizing, and risk management processes,
but uses a simple trend following approach.
Its performance is similar to some
of the 13 strategies considered earlier.
The chart also shows the simulated performance enhancements
that arise from Aspect's research improvements
over this base trend following model.
Each of these enhancements adds value
to Aspect's trend following model
incrementally and consistently.
The simulated information ratios also rise steadily
from 0.76 for the base trend following model
to 1.41 for Aspect's full trend following model.
Aspect's model compared to other trend following models.
Our principled approach in which we observe
different features of trend following,
learn from them, and integrate innovations
to our model based on this research
is a key part of Aspect's systematic investment process.
In our view, this approach is superior
to combining multiple different trend following models.
In figure 21.7 in the supplemental PDF,
we compare the 13 models
with Aspect's trend following model
developed over almost 20 years of evolutionary research.
We see that Aspect's holistic trend following model
outperforms all of the 13 models
over the period under consideration.
Aspect's information ratio of 1.41
is also superior to those of the other models.
The results support the argument
that if the goal is to maximize performance
from trend following,
it is better to build the best possible
single trend following model
that integrates features of various approaches
rather than relying on diversification
from different models.
Additionally, if we subdivide the period
into five-year windows,
we see that Aspect's integrated approach
outperforms in each individual window
as shown in figure 21.8 in the supplemental PDF.
By contrast, among the 13 other trend following models,
there is almost no consistency in performance
between the different five-year windows.
Finally, we demonstrate that Aspect's model
cannot be improved by adding
any of the 13 models considered earlier.
Figure 21.9 in the supplemental PDF
shows the effect of the risk-adjusted return
when Aspect's trend following model
is blended with any of the other 13 models.
Again, we see that the best option
is to choose only Aspect's holistic trend following model
as any combination with other models
will degrade its performance.
Conclusion.
This paper considers the question
of how to build the best trend following system,
either to focus on building a single high-quality model
that combines the best features
of other trend following approaches
or to adopt a multi-model approach to trend following,
relying on diversification between models
to improve the overall risk-return profile.
We have considered a wide range
of different systematic models
that all capture medium-term trend following
and have investigated whether any combinations
of these models provide the best outcome.
Given the high levels of correlation between the strategies,
we actually find that there is
very little diversification to be had.
In summary, the number of individual
trend following models that comprise
the trend following portfolio is not in itself
a measure of its superiority.
The best approach is to focus on building
a single, well-researched trend following model
that integrates key features
of many different trend following approaches
in a superior, coherent framework.
Aspect applies an ongoing research effort
in order to continue to enhance
its trend following model in this way.
Chart disclaimer.
The 13 following models
and aspect diversified results are based on simulated
or hypothetical performance results
that have certain limitations.
Unlike the results shown in an actual performance record,
these results do not represent actual trading.
Past performance is not necessarily
indicative of future results.


# Chapter 44

Chapter 22, Evaluating Trading Strategies,
Campbell R. Harvey and Yan Liu.
Consider the following trading strategy
detailed in Figure 22.1 in the supplemental PDF.
While there is a minor drawdown in the first year,
the strategy is consistently profitable through 2014.
Indeed, the drawdowns throughout the history are minimal.
Importantly, the strategy does well
during the financial crisis.
Overall, this strategy appears very attractive,
and many investment managers would pursue this strategy.
Our research offers some tools to evaluate strategies,
such as the one presented in Figure 22.1.
It turns out that simply looking at average profitability,
consistency, and size of drawdowns
is not sufficient to give a strategy a passing grade.
Testing in other fields of science.
Before presenting our method, it is
important to take a step back and determine
whether there is anything we can learn in finance
from other scientific fields.
While the advent of machine learning
is relatively new to investment management,
similar situations involving a large number of tests
have been around for many years in other sciences.
It makes sense that there may be some insights outside
of finance that are relevant for finance.
Our first example is the widely heralded discovery
of the Higgs boson in 2012.
The particle was first theorized in 1964,
the same year as William Sharp's paper
on the Capital Asset Pricing Model, CAPM, was published.
The first tests of the CAPM were published eight years later,
and Sharp was awarded a Nobel Prize in 1990.
For Peter Higgs, it was a much longer road.
It took years to complete the Large Hadron Collider, LHC,
at a cost of about $5 billion.
The Higgs boson was declared discovered on July 4th, 2012,
and Nobel Prizes were awarded in 2013.
So why is this relevant for finance?
It has to do with the testing method.
Scientists knew that the particle was rare
and that it decays very quickly.
The idea of the LHC is to have beams of particles collide.
Theoretically, you would expect to see the Higgs boson
in one in 10 billion collisions within the LHC.
The boson quickly decays,
and key is measuring the decay signature.
Over a quadrillion collisions were conducted,
and a massive amount of data was collected.
The problem is that each of the so-called decay signatures
can also be produced by normal events from known processes.
To declare a discovery,
scientists agreed to what appeared to be
a very tough standard.
The observed occurrences of the candidate particle,
Higgs boson, had to be five standard deviations
different from a world where there was no new particle.
Five standard deviations
is generally considered a tough standard.
Yet in finance, we routinely accept discoveries
where the T statistic exceeds two, not five.
Indeed, there is a hedge fund called two sigma.
Particle physics is not alone
in having a tougher hurdle to exceed.
Consider the research done in biogenetics.
In genetic association studies,
researchers try to link a certain disease to human genes,
and they do this by testing the causal effect
between the disease and a gene.
Given that there are more than 20,000 human genes
that are expressive, multiple testing is a real issue.
To make it even more challenging,
a disease is often not caused by a single gene,
but the interactions among several genes.
Counting all the possibilities,
the total number of tests can easily exceed a million.
Given this large number of tests,
a tougher standard must be applied.
With the conventional thresholds,
a large percentage of studies
that document significant associations are not replicable.
To give an example, a recent study in nature
claims to find two genetic linkages
for Parkinson's disease.
About a half a million genetic sequences are tested
for the potential association with the disease.
Given this large number of tests,
tens of thousands of genetic sequences
will appear to affect the disease
under conventional standards.
We need a tougher standard
to lower the possibility of false discoveries.
Indeed, the identified gene loci from the tests
have T-statistics that exceed 5.3.
There are many more examples,
such as the search for exoplanets.
However, there is a common theme in these examples.
A higher threshold is required
because the number of tests is large.
For the Higgs boson,
there were potentially trillions of tests.
For research in biogenetics,
there are millions of combinations.
With multiple tests, there is a chance of a fluke finding.
Reevaluating the candidate strategy.
Let's return to the candidate strategy
detailed in figure 22.1 in the supplemental PDF.
This strategy has a sharp ratio of 0.92.
There is a simple formula
to translate the sharp ratio into a T-statistic.
T-statistic equals the sharp ratio
times the square root of the number of years.
In this case, the T-statistic is 2.91.
This means that the observed profitability
is about three standard deviations
from the null hypothesis of zero profitability.
A three sigma event, assuming a normal distribution,
happens only 1% of the time.
This means that the chance that our trading strategy
is a false discovery is less than 1%.
However, we are making a fundamental mistake
with this statistical analysis.
The statement about the false discovery percentage
is conditional on an independent test.
This means there is a single test.
That is unlikely to be the case in our trading strategy,
and it was certainly not the case
with the research conducted at the LHC
where there were trillions of tests.
With multiple tests, we need to adjust our hurdles
for established statistical significance.
This is the reason why the researchers at LRC
used a five sigma rule.
This is the reason why biomedical researchers
routinely look for four sigma events.
Multiple testing is also salient in finance.
Yet little has been done to adjust the way
that we conduct our tests.
Figure 22.2 in the supplemental PDF
completes the trading strategy example.
Each of the trading strategies in figure 22.2
was randomly generated at the daily frequency.
We assumed an annual volatility of 15%,
about the same as the S&P 500,
and a mean return of zero.
The candidate trading strategy highlighted in figure 22.1
is the best strategy in figure 22.2,
thick gray curve ending near top right corner of chart.
To be clear, all of the strategies in figure 22.2
are based on random numbers, not actual returns.
While the candidate trading strategy in figure 22.1
seemed very attractive, it was simply a fluke.
Yet the usual tools of statistical analysis
would have declared this strategy significant.
The techniques we will offer in this paper
will declare the candidate strategy
with a sharp ratio of 0.92 insignificant.
It is crucial to correct for multiple testing.
Consider a simple example
which has some similarities to the above.
Suppose we're interested in predicting Y.
We propose a candidate variable X.
We run a regression and get a T statistic of 2.0.
Assuming that no one else had tried to predict Y before,
this qualifies as an independent test
and X would be declared significant at the 5% level.
Now let's change the problem.
Suppose we still want to predict Y.
However, now we have 20 different X variables,
X sub one, X sub two, to X sub 20.
Suppose one of these variables
achieves a T statistic of 2.0.
Is it really a true predictor?
Probably not.
By random chance, when you try so many variables,
one might work.
Here is another classic example of multiple tests.
Suppose you receive a promotional email
from an investment manager promoting a stock.
The email asks you to judge the record
of recommendations in real time.
Only a single stock is recommended
and the recommendation is either long or short.
You get an email every week for 10 weeks.
Each week, the manager is correct.
The track record is amazing
because the probability of such an occurrence
is very small, 0.5 to the 10th power
equals 0.000976.
Conventional statistics would say
there is a very small chance, 0.00976%.
This is a false discovery, that is,
the manager is no good.
You hire the manager.
Later, you find out the strategy.
The manager randomly picks a stock
and initially sends out 100,000 emails
with 50% sang long and 50% sang short.
If the stock goes up in value,
the next week's mailing list is trimmed to 50,000,
only sending the long recommendations.
Every week, the list is reduced by 50%.
By the end of the 10th week,
97 people would have received this amazing track record
of 10 correct picks in a row.
If these 97 people had realized
how the promotion was organized,
then getting 10 in a row would be expected.
Indeed, you get the 97 people
by multiplying 100,000 by 0.5.
There is no skill here.
It is random.
There are many obvious applications.
One that is immediate
is in the evaluation of fund managers.
With over 10,000 managers,
you expect some to randomly outperform year after year.
Indeed, if managers were randomly choosing strategies,
you would expect at least 300 of them
to have five consecutive years of outperformance.
Our research offers some guidance
on handling these multiple testing problems.
Two views of multiple testing.
There are two main approaches
to the multiple testing problem in statistics.
They are known as the family-wise error rate, F-W-E-R,
and the false discovery rate.
The distinction between the two is very intuitive.
In the family-wise error rate,
it is unacceptable to make a single false discovery.
This is a very severe rule,
but completely appropriate for certain situations.
With the F-W-E-R,
one false discovery is unacceptable in 100 tests
and equally as unacceptable in 1 million tests.
In contrast, the false discovery rate views unacceptable
in terms of a proportion.
For example, if one false discovery
was unacceptable for 100 tests,
then 10 are unacceptable for 1,000 tests.
The F-D-R is much less severe than the F-W-E-R.
Which is the more appropriate method?
It depends on the application.
For instance, the Mars One Foundation
is planning a one-way manned trip to Mars in 2024
and has plans for many additional landings.
It is unacceptable to have any critical part fail
during the mission.
A critical failure, as an example, is a false discovery.
We thought the part was good, but it was not.
Just as we thought the investment manager was good,
but she was not.
The best-known F-W-E-R test is called the Bonferroni test.
It is also the simplest test to implement.
Suppose we start with a two-sigma rule
for a single, independent test.
This would imply a T ratio of 2.0.
The interpretation is that the chance
of the single false discovery is only 5%.
Remember, a single false discovery is unacceptable.
Equivalently, we can say that we have 95% confidence
that we are not making a false discovery.
Now, consider increasing the number of tests to 10.
The Bonferroni method adjusts for the multiple tests.
Given the chance that one test
could randomly show up as significant,
the Bonferroni requires the confidence level increase.
Instead of 5%, you take the 5%
and divide by the number of tests,
that is, 5% divided by 10 equals 0.5%.
Again, equivalently, you need to be 99.5% confident
with 10 tests that you are not making
a single false discovery.
In terms of the T statistic,
the Bonferroni requires a statistic
of at least 2.8 for 10 tests.
For 1,000 tests, the statistic must exceed 4.1.
However, there are three issues with the Bonferroni test.
First, there is the general issue
about FWR error rate versus FDR.
Evaluating a trading strategy is not a mission to Mars.
Being wrong could cost you your job
and money will be lost,
but it is unlikely a matter of life and death.
However, reasonable people may disagree with this view.
The second issue is related to correlation among the tests.
There is a big difference between trying 10 variables
that are all highly correlated
and 10 variables that are perfectly unrelated.
Indeed, at the extreme,
if the 10 tests were perfectly correlated,
this is equivalent to a single independent test.
The third issue is that the Bonferroni test
omits important information.
Since the work of home,
it has been known that there is information
in the individual collection of test statistics
and can be used to sharpen the test.
The Bonferroni test ignores all this information
and derives a hurdle rate
from the original level of significance
divided by the total number of tests.
Let's first tackle the last issue.
Home provides a way to deal with the information
in the test statistics.
Again, suppose we have 10 tests.
We know that the hurdle for the Bonferroni method
would be 0.005 or 0.5%.
The Home method begins by sorting the tests
from the lowest p-value, most significant,
to the highest, least significant.
Let's call the first k equals one
and the last k equals 10.
Starting from the first test,
the Home function is evaluated.
P-value times k equals the quotient
of a divided by m plus one minus k,
where alpha is the level of significance,
0.05 in our case,
and m is the total number of tests.
Suppose the most significant test in our example
has a p-value of 0.001.
Calculating the Home function,
we get 0.5 divided by 10 plus one minus one equals 0.005.
The Home function gives the hurdle.
Observed p-value must be lower than the hurdle.
Given the first test has a p-value of 0.001,
it passes the test.
Notice the hurdle for the first test
is identical to the Bonferroni.
However, in contrast to the Bonferroni,
which has a single threshold for all tests,
the other tests will have a different hurdle under Home.
For example, the second test would be 0.05
divided by 10 plus one minus two equals 0.0055.
Starting from the first test,
we sequentially compare the p-values with their hurdles.
When we first come across the test
such that its p-value fails to meet the hurdle,
we reject this test and all others with higher p-values.
The Home test captures the information
in the distribution of the test statistics.
The Home test is less stringent than the Bonferroni
because the hurdles are relaxed after the first test.
However, the Home still fits
into the category of the F-W-E-R.
Next, we explore the other approach.
As mentioned earlier, the false discovery rate approach
allows an expected proportional error rate.
As such, it is less stringent
than both the Bonferroni and the Home test.
It is also easier to implement.
Again, we sort the tests.
The B-H-Y formula is p times k
equals the quotient of k times a divided by m times c of m,
where c of m is a simple function
that is increasing in m and equals 2.93 when m equals 10.
In contrast to the Home test,
we start from the last test, least significant,
and evaluate the B-H-Y formula.
For the last test, k equals m equals 10.
The B-H-Y hurdle is 0.05 divided by c of 10
equals 0.05 divided by 2.93, which equals 0.0171.
For the second last test, k equals m minus one equals nine.
The B-H-Y hurdle is nine times 0.05
divided by 10 times 2.93 equals 0.0154.
Notice that these hurdles are larger and thus more lenient
than the Bonferroni implied hurdle.
That is 0.0050.
Starting from the last test,
we sequentially compared the p values
with their threshold.
When we first come across the test
such that its p value falls below its threshold,
we declare this test significant
and all tests that have a lower p value.
Similar to the Home test,
B-H-Y also relies on the distribution of test statistics.
However, in contrast to the Home test
that begins with the most significant test,
the B-H-Y approach starts with the least significant test.
There are usually more discoveries with B-H-Y.
The reason is that B-H-Y allows
for an unexpected proportion of false discoveries,
which is less demanding than the absolute occurrence
of false discoveries under the F-W-E-R approaches.
We believe the B-H-Y approach is the most appropriate
for evaluating trading strategies,
false discoveries and missed discoveries.
So far, we have discussed false discoveries
which are trading strategies that appear to be profitable,
but they are not.
Multiple testing adjusts the hurdle for significance
because some tests will appear significant by chance.
The downside of doing this
is that some truly significant strategies
might be overlooked because they did not pass
the more stringent hurdle.
This is the classic tension between type one errors
and type two errors.
Type one error is the false discovery,
investing in an unprofitable trading strategy.
The type two error is missing
a truly profitable trading strategy.
Inevitably, there is a trade-off between these two errors.
In addition, in a multiple testing setting,
it is not obvious how to jointly optimize
these two types of errors.
Our view is the following.
Making the mistake of using the single test criteria
for multiple tests induces a very large number
of false discoveries, large amount of type one error.
When we increase the hurdle,
we greatly reduce the type one error
at minimal cost to the type two missing discoveries.
Figure 22.3 illustrates this point in the included PDF.
Panel A denotes the mistake of using single test methods.
There are two distributions.
The first is the distribution of strategies that don't work.
It has an average return rate of zero.
The second is the distribution
of truly profitable strategies,
which has a mean return greater than zero.
Notice that there is a large amount
of type one error, false discoveries.
Panel B shows what happens when we increase the threshold.
Notice the number of false discoveries
is dramatically reduced.
However, the increase in missed discoveries is minimal.
Haircutting the sharp ratios.
Harvey and Lou provide a method
for adjusting sharp ratios
to take into account multiple testing.
Sharp ratios based on historical back tests
are often inflated because of multiple testing.
Researchers explore many strategies
and often choose to present the one
with the largest sharp ratio.
But the sharp ratio for this strategy
no longer represents its true expected profitability.
With a large number of tests,
it is very likely that the selected strategy
will appear to be highly profitable just by chance.
To take this into account,
we need to haircut the reported sharp ratio.
In addition, the haircut needs to be larger
if there are more tests tried.
Take the candidate strategy in figure 22.1
in the supplemental PDF as an example.
It has a sharp ratio of 0.92
and a corresponding T statistic of 2.91.
The P value is 0.4%
and hence if there were only one test,
the strategy would look very attractive
because there is only a 0.4% chance it is a fluke.
However, with 200 tests tried,
the story is completely different.
Using the Bonferroni multiple testing method,
we need to adjust the P value cutoff
to 0.05 divided by 200
equals 0.00025.
Hence, we would need to observe a T statistic
of at least 3.66 to declare the strategy
a true discovery with 95% confidence.
The observed T statistic 2.92 is well below 3.66,
hence we would pass on this strategy.
There is an equivalent way of looking
at the Bonferroni test.
To declare a strategy true,
its P value must be less than some predetermined threshold
such as 5% or 95% confidence
if the identified strategy is not false.
P value of test less than threshold.
Bonferroni divides the threshold 0.05
by the number of tests, our case 200.
P value of test less than 0.05 divided by 200.
Equivalently, we could multiply the P value
of the individual test by 200
and check each test to identify
which ones are less than 0.05.
That is, P value of test times 200 is less than 0.05.
In our case, the original P value is 0.004
and when we multiply by 200,
the adjusted P value is 0.80
and the corresponding T statistic is 0.25.
This high P value is significantly greater
than the threshold 0.05.
Our method asks how large the Sharpe ratio should be
in order to generate a T statistic of 0.25.
The answer is 0.08.
Therefore, knowing that 200 tests have been tried
and under Bonferroni's test,
we successfully declare the candidate strategy
with the original Sharpe ratio of 0.92 is insignificant.
The Sharpe ratio that adjusts for multiple tests
is only 0.08.
The corresponding haircut is large.
91% equals the quantity 0.92 minus 0.08 divided by 0.92.
Turning to the other two approaches,
the home test makes the same adjustment as Bonferroni
since the T statistic for the candidate strategy
is the smallest among the 200 strategies.
Not surprisingly, BHY also strongly rejects
the candidate strategy.
The fact that each of the multiple testing methods
rejects the candidate strategy is a good outcome
because we know all of these 200 strategies
are just random numbers.
A proper test also depends on the correlation
among test statistics as we discussed previously.
This is not an issue in the 200 strategies
because we did not impose any correlation structure
on the random variables.
Harvey and Lou explicitly take the correlation
among tests into account and provide
a multiple testing adjusted Sharpe ratios
using a variety of methods.
An example with Standard & Poor's Capital IQ.
To see how our method works on a real data set
of strategy returns, we use the S&P Capital IQ database.
It includes detailed information on the time series
of 484 strategies for the U.S. equity market.
Additionally, these strategies are cataloged
into eight groups based on the types of risks
to which they are exposed.
We choose the most profitable strategy
from each of the three categories,
price momentum, analyst expectations,
and capital efficiency.
These trading strategies are before costs
and as such, the Sharpe ratios will be overstated.
The top performers in the three categories
generate Sharpe ratios of 0.83, 0.37,
and 0.67 respectively.
The corresponding T statistics are 3.93, 1.14, and 3.17,
and their P values under independent testing
are 0.0008, 0.2543, and 0.0015.
We use the BHY method, our recommended method,
to adjust the three P values based on the P values
for the 484 strategies.
We assume the total number of tried strategies is 484,
that is, there are no missing tests.
The BHY adjusted P values are 0.0134, 0.9995,
and 0.1093, and their associated T statistics
are 2.47, 0.00, and 1.60.
The adjusted Sharpe ratios are 0.52, 0.00,
and 0.34 respectively.
Therefore, by applying the BHY method,
we haircut the Sharpe ratios of the three top performers
by 37%, equals the quantity 0.83 minus 0.52,
divided by 0.83, 100% equals the quantity 0.42 minus 0,
divided by 0.42, and 49% equals the quantity 0.67
minus 0.34 divided by 0.67.
In sample and out of sample.
Until now, we evaluate trading strategies
from an in sample IS testing perspective,
that is, we use all the information
in the history of returns to make a judgment.
Alternatively, we can divide the history
into two sub-samples, one in sample period
and the other out of sample OOS period,
and use OOS observations to evaluate decisions
made based on the IS period.
There are a number of immediate issues.
First, often the OOS period is not really out of sample
because the researcher knows
what has happened in that period.
Second, in dicing up the data,
we run into the possibility that,
with fewer observations in the in sample period,
we might not have enough power to identify true strategies.
That is, some profitable trading strategies
do not make it to the OOS stage.
Finally, with few observations in the OOS period,
some true strategies from the IS period
may not pass the test in the OOS period
and be mistakenly discarded.
Indeed, for the three strategies in the capital IQ data,
if we use the recent five years as the OOS period
for the OOS approach, the OOS sharp ratios are 0.64,
negative 0.3, and 0.18, respectively.
We see that the third strategy has a small sharp ratio
and is insignificant, p-value equals 0.53,
for this five-year OOS period,
although it is borderline significant for the full sample,
p-value equals 0.11,
even after multiple testing adjustment.
The problem is that with only 60 monthly observations
in the OOS period, a true strategy
will have a good chance to fail the OOS test.
Recent research by Lopez de Prado and his co-authors
pursues the out-of-sample route
and develops a concept called
the probability of back-test overfitting, PBO,
to gauge the extent of back-test overfitting.
In particular, the PBO measures how likely it is
for a superior strategy that is fit IS
to underperform in the OOS period.
It succinctly captures the degree of back-test overfitting
from a probabilistic perspective
and should be useful in a variety of situations.
To see the differences between the IS and OOS approach,
we again take the 200 strategy returns
in Figure 2 as an example.
One way to do OOS testing is to divide the entire sample
in halves and evaluate the performance
of these 200 strategies based on the first half
of the sample, IS, that is, the first five years.
The evaluation is then put into further scrutiny
based on the second half of the sample, OOS.
The idea is that strategies that appear to be significant
for the in-sample period but are actually not true
will likely to perform poorly for the out-of-sample period.
Our IS sample approach, on the other hand,
uses all 10 years information and makes the decision
at the end of the sample.
Using the method developed by Lopez de Prado
and his co-authors, we can calculate PBO to be 0.45.
Therefore, there is a high chance,
that is, a probability of 0.45,
for the IS best performer
to have a below median performance in the OOS.
This is consistent with our result
that based on the entire sample,
the best performer is insignificant
if we take multiple testing into account.
However, unlike the PBO approach
that evaluates a particular strategy selection procedure,
our method determines a haircut-sharp ratio
for each of the strategies.
In principle, we believe there are merits
in both the PBO as well as the multiple testing approaches.
A successful merger of these approaches
could potentially yield more powerful tools
to help asset managers
successfully evaluate trading strategies.
Trading strategies and financial products.
The multiple testing problem greatly confounds
the identification of truly profitable trading strategies
and the same problems applied to a variety of sciences.
Indeed, there is an influential paper in medicine by Ioannidis
called, Why Most Published Research Findings Are False.
Harvey, Lou, and Zhu,
look at 315 different financial factors
and conclude that most are likely false
after you apply the insights from multiple testing.
In medicine, the first researcher to publish a new finding
is subject to what they call the winner's curse.
Given the multiple tests,
subsequent papers are likely to find a lesser effect
or no effect,
which would mean the research paper
would have to be retracted.
Similar effects are evident in finance
where Schwert and McLean and Pontiff
find that the impact of famous finance anomalies
is greatly diminished out of sample
or never existed in the first place.
So where does this leave us?
First, there is no reason to think
that there is any difference
between physical sciences and finance.
Most of the empirical research in finance,
whether published in academic journals
or put into production as an active trading strategy
by an investment manager is likely false.
Second, this implies that half the financial products
promising outperformance
that companies are selling to clients are false.
To be clear, we are not accusing asset managers
of knowingly selling false products.
We are pointing out that the statistical tools
being employed to evaluate these trading strategies
are inappropriate.
This critique also applies
to much of the academic empirical literature in finance,
including many papers by one of the authors
of this paper, Harvey.
It is also clear that investment managers
want to promote products
that are most likely to outperform in the future.
That is, there is a strong incentive
to get the testing right.
No one wants to disappoint a client
and no one wants to lose their bonus or their job.
Employing the statistical tools of multiple testing
in the evaluation of trading strategies
reduces the number of false discoveries.
Limitations and conclusions.
Our work has two important limitations.
First, for a number of applications,
the Sharpe ratio is not appropriate
because the distribution of the strategy returns
is not normal.
For example, two trading strategies
might have identical Sharpe ratios,
but one of them might be preferred
because it has less severe downside risk.
Second, our work focuses on individual strategies.
In actual practice, the investment manager
needs to examine how the proposed strategy interacts
with the current collection of strategies.
For example, a strategy with a lower Sharpe
might be preferred because the strategy
is relatively uncorrelated with current strategies.
The denominator in the Sharpe ratio
is simply the strategy volatility
and does not measure the contribution of the strategy
to the portfolio volatility.
The strategy portfolio problem,
that is adding a new strategy
to a portfolio of existing strategies,
is the topic of Harvey and Lou.
In summary, the message of our research is simple.
Researchers and finance,
whether practitioners or academics,
need to realize that they will find
seemingly successful trading strategies by chance.
We can no longer use the traditional tools
of statistical analysis that assume
that no one has looked at the data before
and there is only a single strategy tried.
A multiple testing framework offers help
in reducing the number of false strategies
adapted by firms.
Two Sigma is no longer an appropriate benchmark
for evaluating trading strategies.


# Chapter 45

Chapter 23, Black Box Trend Following,
Lifting the Veil,
Nigal Kalajan and Paul Zukwianik,
Quest Partners, LLC.
The goal of this research series is to demystify
specific black box CTA trend following strategies
and to analyze their characteristics,
both as a standalone product,
as well as within a portfolio
of typical financial instruments.
Synopsis.
The goal of this paper is to help CTA investors
familiarize themselves with black box
trend following strategies.
The paper highlights the sensitivity of returns
to some of the optimizations that are available.
Specifically, we will, one, provide transparent
CTA black box trend following trading strategies,
including specific parameters, markets to be traded,
and risk management strategies.
Two, analyze the source of returns
of such trading strategies and compare their returns
to the Barclays BTOP 50 Managed Futures Index,
BTOP 50, and the S&P 500 Index, SP 500.
Three, break down performance per sector
and per trade direction, long versus short.
Four, investigate the stability of the parameters used.
Five, explore the capacity of such strategies
to hedge stock market risk.
Some of our findings are, one, simple, liquid,
and fully transparent CTA strategies,
such as moving average crossovers and channel breakouts,
explain most of the returns of the BTOP 50.
These strategies are stable across parameters.
Two, these simple strategies compare favorably
to the BTOP 50 and the SP 500,
both in terms of returns and risk-adjusted returns.
Three, these strategies have positive skew.
They tend to benefit from increases in volatility
and SP 500 down moves.
Four, in the past 20 years,
most of the returns of these strategies
have come from long trades, the fixed income sector,
and longer term trading frequencies.
Optimizing around these data points
should be done with care.
Five, the SP 500 lost about 130%
in its worst four drawdowns of the past 20 years.
In these same four periods,
the two strategies we proposed
generated over plus 140% each.
The strategies, strategy mechanics.
The two technical indicators that are most commonly used
as trend following filters are channel breakout
and simple moving average crossovers.
These two indicators have been used
since the early 70s or before.
Both these indicators have high correlation
to CTA indexes and traditional CTAs.
As such, they are a great proxy for the strategies
that CTAs use in their portfolios.
We can use their performance
to study the performance of CTAs in general.
Both strategies, in the form that we are going to discuss,
are pure reversal strategies.
They are always in the market long or short.
Both strategies use daily data for their computations.
Both strategies are stable across parameters
as will be shown.
For our purposes, we will specifically use
the 50-day channel breakout, CB50,
and the 10 by 100 simple moving average crossover,
MA 10 by 100 strategies.
These are the trading rules for the models.
50-day channel breakout, CB50, C equals close of today.
HC50, highest close in the last 50 days, including today.
LC50, lowest close in the last 50 days, including today.
Long signal, if C equals HC50,
then go long tomorrow market on open.
Short signal, if C equals LC50,
then go short tomorrow market on open.
10 by 100 simple moving average crossover, MA 10 by 100.
MA 10 equals average of the last 10 closes, including today.
MA 100, average of the last 100 closes, including today.
Long signal, if MA 10 is greater than MA 100,
then go long tomorrow market on open.
Short signal, if MA 10 is less than MA 100,
then go short tomorrow market on open.
Markets traded.
We apply each of the two trend following models
to a diversified portfolio of 24 foreign exchange
and futures markets.
These markets comprise four distinct sectors,
foreign exchange, fixed income, equity indexes,
and commodities.
Risk is allocated equally to all sectors.
There are six markets in each sector.
Foreign exchange, euro US dollar,
British pound US dollar, euro British pound,
euro Japanese yen, US dollar Japanese yen,
British pound Japanese yen.
Fixed income, US bond 30 year, US note 10 year,
German bond 10 year, Japanese government bond,
euro dollar three months, euro bore three months.
Equity index, S&P 500, NASDAQ 100, euro stocks 50,
DAX, Nikkei 225, Hang Seng.
Commodity, light crude oil, heating oil,
natural gas, gold, silver, corn.
Data notes, daily sample data was used.
Continuous price series for futures contracts
were created using a standard back adjusting mechanism
relying on contract open interest as role trigger.
Bloomberg was used as a source for historical cash
for an exchange data.
For the sake of simplicity,
interest rate differences between currencies were ignored
as they have negligible impact on our results.
Trade sizing, all markets are allocated
equal risk at trade entry.
Position sizing is proportional to account size
and inversely proportional to market volatility.
The measure of volatility that was used
is the standard deviation of daily price changes,
not the standard deviation of daily percentage price changes.
Volatility was measured over a 100 day period
preceding each trade.
All 24 markets were treated identically.
Position size was determined at trade inception
and was kept constant until trade was closed.
TS equals 0.001 times AS divided by VOL times PV.
Trade size in number of contracts at trade initiation
equals 0.001 times account size in US dollars
at beginning of month divided by the volatility
as measured by standard deviation of daily price changes
over the preceding 100 days times point value
and US dollars for 1.0 point move in price for one contract.
TS equals trade size and number contracts
at trade initiation.
AS equals account size in US dollars
at beginning of the month.
VOL equals volatility as measured by standard deviation
of daily price changes over the preceding 100 days.
PV equals point value in US dollars
for one point move in price for one contract.
This methodology of trade sizing is simple and robust.
Unlike some other trade sizing methods
such as fixed number of contracts per trade
or fixed US dollar face value allocation per trade,
it is independent of nominal price level
and it can be applied in identical fashion
across several market sectors.
Sector weights.
The selected markets are highly liquid.
They comprise the majority of the liquidity available
within each respective sector
and are representative of the exposure
of a typical CTA today.
It is important to note that from the late 80s
to the early 90s,
CTA's shifted a considerable amount of risk exposure
from the commodity and FX sectors
to the financial and stock indexes sectors.
We assume a fixed sector allocation
over time in our simulations.
Time span.
The time period of our study spans over 20 years
starting January 1990 and ending June 2010.
Some markets that we used in our tests
did not exist in 1990.
In these cases,
we use data from market inception onwards.
Of the markets we chose to use,
22 were active as of December 1990
and all were active by December 1998.
Special consideration was given to the euro currency
which was introduced January 1st, 1999.
Prior to January 1st, 1999,
the German mark was used instead of the euro
in the relevant foreign exchange crosses.
Commission and slippage.
Throughout the study,
we used conservative commission and slippage assumptions.
Commissions were assumed to be $24 per round turn
for futures contracts.
Slippage assumptions were contract specific
and averaged $87 per round turn.
For the CB50 and MA 10 by 100 strategies,
this translates into slippage and commission costs
of 2% and 2.58% per annum respectively.
We note that in the 80s and 90s,
prior to introduction of electronic exchanges,
markets weren't as liquid
as they have been over the past decade.
The execution cost assumptions used in this study
are significantly higher than those experienced
during the past 10 years of live trading
at Quest Partners.
But are appropriate for the overall study period.
Interest.
Assuming a fully funded trading account,
full interest was included
in the simulated performance results.
The one month US dollar LIBOR
was used to calculate the interest return
on the cash held in the trading account.
Fees.
Where indicated, fees of 1% management
and 20% incentive were charged on the strategy's accounts.
Performance results and graphs.
Please see the supplemental PDF for visuals.
The returns of the two simple
trend following strategies are attractive.
Gross as well as net of fees,
these simple models outperform the SP500
and BTOP 50 indexes.
The MA 10 by 100 and the CB50
respectively annualized 15.1% and 12.8%
over the 20 year period of study.
On a return to maximum peak to trough drawdown basis,
the strategies outperform the SP500
by a factor of three or more.
The strategies return to maximum peak to trough drawdown
is slightly less than that of the BTOP 50.
The indexes outperformance can be explained
by the fact that a substantial portion of its returns
is due to interest earned on the funding capital
rather than actual trading.
We estimate that the interest earned on cash
is about 4.26% out of the 7.7% return of the index.
The strategies sharp ratios over the period
are superior to SP500 and BTOP 50 indexes.
This holds even after management and incentive fees
are deducted from the returns.
The skew of the strategies returns is between 0.25 and 0.29
slightly under the skew of the BTOP 50
but substantially higher than the negative skew
of the SP500 returns.
This implies that the strategies are a good hedge
for surprises or increases in volatility.
This is a valuable characteristic
from a portfolio construction perspective.
We will address skew and its importance
in risk measurement and portfolio construction
in a separate research note.
Note that the negative skew on the SP500
implies that surprises tend to be negative
for the stock market.
The correlation of the strategies to the SP500
is slightly negative indicating
that they are a good diversifier to the SP500.
The alpha of the strategies to the SP500
is substantial at 5% to 11% per year.
The ability of these strategies to hedge the SP500
is discussed in the summary of this paper
and will be further analyzed in a separate research note.
The correlation of the strategies to the BTOP 50
is high at around 70%.
The beta of the strategies to the BTOP 50 is around one.
These strategies are therefore very good proxies
for CTAs and the CTA index in general.
The models have 2.2% to 6.7% alpha to the CTA index.
A good portion of this alpha is due to high fee
structures and high commission rates
that were prevalent in CTAs
in the first 10 years of the study.
The returns of these strategies can be improved
by diversifying the portfolio across more markets
than the current 24.
Another way to easily improve the results
is by trading a diversified portfolio of these models
using a range of parameters
rather than the current fixed chosen values.
Sector performance.
We now point our attention to the performance
of the strategies within specific sectors.
Please see the supplemental PDF for the visuals.
It is clear that the best performing sector
over the last 20 years is fixed income
followed by FX, equities and commodities.
For both models over 45% of the overall return
is derived from trading in this single market sector.
This is an important factor to consider
when comparing CTAs with a large portfolio
waiting in fixed income as their outperformance
might be confused with superior trading methodologies.
Large CTAs tend to have outsized allocations
to the fixed income sector due to its liquidity.
The last 20 years have been a stellar environment
for fixed income trading.
The yields of the 30 year US Treasury bond
have gone down from 8% in January 1990
to 4% in July 2010.
It is highly unlikely that yields continue to drop
as they have in the last 20 years.
An uptrending fixed income market yields going down
is highly favorable to a downtrending fixed income market
due to the positive carry that is earned while being long
in a typically positively sloped yield curve.
Performance of long versus short trades.
Since the two strategies are entirely symmetric
between the long and short side from a trading perspective,
it is surprising to see how profitable
the long trades are compared to the shorts.
For visuals, please see the supplemental PDF.
The returns and risk adjusted returns
of the long side of the two strategies
are superior to the short side of the strategies.
Both strategies produce over 85% of profits
from trading on the long side of the market.
The strategies spend about 45% of the time
on the short side of the market.
The long side of the trading strategies
has a much higher correlation to the SP500
than the short side
and is therefore not as valuable
as in addition to a portfolio of financial assets.
The long side of the trading strategies
also has a much lower skew than the short.
Zero versus 1.66 for the MA 10 by 100
and 0.09 versus 1.56 for the CB 50.
It is therefore not as stable in a volatile environment.
The long side of the strategies has a neutral convexity
while the short side is positively convex.
Positive convexity should be a very high priority
for CTA strategies as they are typically used as a hedge
or diversifier in volatile
and falling stock market environments.
Skew is a very important factor
in predicting the hedging potential of an investment.
It is critical for investors into CTA strategies
to be aware of the optimization risks that they are taking
should they invest in a CTA who has improved his returns
and risk adjusted returns
through the trading of the long side of the markets only.
We will discuss this anomaly in more detail
in a future research note.
We will also provide methods of return analysis
that could shed light on whether a CTA is taking advantage
of this characteristic to improve returns.
Stability of parameters.
We shifted the parameters of the MA 10 by 100
and CB 50 models to get a sense of how dependent
our analysis is on the particular parameter choice
we made.
Please see the supplemental PDF for the visuals.
Both the moving average crossover
and the channel breakout models
are stable across parameters.
For both the MA and CB models,
the longer term timeframes had higher returns
and risk adjusted returns.
As an example, the 150 day channel breakout model
compounded at over 19% per year
versus just under 13% for the 50 day channel breakout.
The sharp ratio of the CB 150 was 0.89
versus 0.56 for the CB 50.
It would be obvious that one should be trading
the longer term strategies
if it was not for the less positive skew
that these strategies exhibit.
Indeed, these very long term strategies
are much more vulnerable to dramatic reversals
than their shorter term counterparts.
As an example, in the large trend reversals of August 2007,
the CB 50 was up 0.5%
while CB 150 was down negative 5.79%.
Similarly, the MA 10 by 100 was up 0.95%
while the MA 10 by 200 was down negative 3.45%.
A point to consider is that large CTAs,
due to their more significant slippage costs,
tend to focus on the longer term frequencies of trading.
This does not give them access to the positive skew
which translates into strong hedging characteristics
that are valuable in portfolios.
CTAs are typically expected to shine
during such dramatic market reversals
as those that occurred in August 2007.
The longer term models do not have the reactivity
that is necessary to meet such an expectation.
Are CTAs a diversifier or a hedge to the SP 500?
It is common knowledge that CTAs
have only a slight negative correlation to the SP 500
and are therefore not a hedge for the stock market
and stock market related investments.
CTAs are typically considered a diversifier
for stock market risk and are therefore allocated
a minor portion of typical financial portfolios.
On further analysis of this correlation number,
one notices that in months when the SP 500 is down,
negative 3% or more,
the correlation of the CB 50 MA 10 by 100
and BTO P 50 to the SP 500
is actually a significant negative 45% to negative 56%.
In other words,
CTAs have a tendency to hedge stock market corrections
without necessarily giving back returns
during the SP 500 up months.
This makes CTAs a good hedge
to stock market related investments.
This strength is further compounded by the fact
that our models and BTO P 50
generate 4% to 7% annual alpha to the SP 500
and have substantial returns on their own.
In effect,
CTA strategies have long-term positive returns
and strong insurance characteristics.
This is an exceptionally powerful combination
that should be utilized in most portfolios.
For a visual, see the supplemental PDF.
Next, we consider the absolute returns
of the CTA strategies during the worst four drawdowns
of the SP 500.
In four periods where the SP 500
lost a total of over negative 130%,
the CTA strategies made 142% and 166% respectively.
Few hedge fund strategies succeeded
in generating positive returns
during significant SP 500 drawdowns in the past 20 years.
As will be further analyzed in future research notes,
these returns are a byproduct of the positive skew
that CTA strategies display.
In effect, CTA strategies tend to benefit
not only from trends,
but also from the increases in volatility
that inevitably occur during SP 500 drawdowns.
What is even more surprising
is that this characteristic is not the byproduct
of option gamma exposure,
but due to direct liquid and transparent futures trading.
For visuals, please see the supplemental PDF.
For illustration, we also include the returns
of the two discussed CTA strategies and the BTOP 50
during the 10 worst quarters and 20 worst months
for the SP 500.
Both graphs confirm the hedge quality of CTAs
during strong down quarters and down months
for the SP 500.
For visuals, please see the supplemental PDF.
Summary.
One, the typical CTA and the CTA indexes
can easily be duplicated using simple,
well-known trend following filters,
such as moving averages and channel breakouts.
Two, models based on these trend filters
have performed well as standalone investments.
Three, these models have approximately
negative 50% correlation to the SP 500
when it is down more than negative 3% in a month.
The hedging characteristic of these models
comes without a commensurate downside
during strong stock market periods.
Four, during the last 20 years,
three shifts in these models
would have considerably improved performance
relative to benchmarks.
These shifts are, one,
increasing the weight of the fixed income sector,
accounts for over 50% of the performance
of the typical CTA portfolio.
Two, trading the long side only accounts
for over 85% of the performance
of the typical CTA portfolio.
And three, trading longer term frequencies
than the typical portfolio.
All three of these shifts negatively affect
the ability to hedge stock market downturns.
However, they improve risk adjusted returns
during typical low volatility periods,
such as the ones that were experienced
in the last 20 years.
As we will discuss in future papers,
these style drifts are apparent in the CTA index.
Investors should evaluate CTA outperformance
with special attention to these three variables.


# Chapter 46

Chapter 24. Risk Management. Etsukoda. Risk.
Risk is the possibility of loss. That is, if we own some stock and there is a possibility of a price
decline, we are at risk. The stock is not the risk, nor is the loss the risk. The possibility
of loss is the risk. As long as we own the stock, we are at risk. The only way to control the risk
is to buy or sell stock. In the matter of owning stocks and aiming for profit, risk is fundamentally
unavoidable and the best we can do is to manage the risk. Risk Management. To manage is to direct
and control. Risk management is to direct and control the possibility of loss. The activities
of a risk manager are to measure risk and to increase and decrease risk by buying and
selling stock. The Coin Toss Example. Let's say we have a coin that we can toss and that it comes
up heads or tails with equal probability. The coin toss example helps to present the concepts
of risk management. The probability of an event is the likelihood of that event expressing as
the ratio of the number of actual occurrences to the number of possible occurrences. So,
if the coin comes up heads 50 times out of 100, then the probability of heads is 50%.
Notice that a probability has to be between 0, 0.0 equals 0% equals impossible, and 1,
1.0 equals 100% equals certain. Let's say the rules for the game are 1, we start with $1,000,
2. We always bet that heads come up, 3. We can bet any amount that we have left, 4. If
tails come up, we lose our bet, 5. If heads come up, we do not lose our bet, instead we
win twice as much as we bet, and 6. The coin is fair and so the probability of heads is
50%. This game is similar to some trading methods. In this case, our luck equals the
probability of winning, or 50%. We will be lucky 50% of the time. Our payoff equals 2
to 1, since we win 2 for every 1 we bet. Our risk is the amount of money we wager and therefore
place at risk on the next toss. In this example, our luck and our payoff stay constant
and only our bet may change. In more complicated games, such as actual stock trading, luck
and payoff may change with changing market conditions. Traders seem to spend considerable
time and effort trying to change their luck and their payoff, generally to no avail, since
it is not theirs to change. The risk is the only parameter the risk manager may effectively
change to control risk. We might also model more complicated games with a matrix of locks
and payoffs to see a range of possible outcomes. This matrix might model a put-and-take game
with a six-sided spinning top, or even trading. See figure 24.1 in the supplemental PDF.
Optimal Betting In our coin toss example, we have constant
luck at 50%, constant payoff at 2 to 1, and we always bet on heads. To find a risk management
strategy, we have to find a way to manage the bet. This is similar to the problem confronting
a risk manager in the business of trading stocks. Good managers realize that there is
not much they can do about luck and payoff, and that the essential problem is to determine
how much to wager on the stock. We begin our game with $1,000.
Hunches and Systems One way to determine a bet size is by hunch.
We might have a hunch and bet $100. Although hunch-centric betting is certainly popular
and likely accounts for an enormous proportion of actual real-world betting, it has several
problems. The bets require the constant attention of an operator to generate hunches and interpret
them into bets, and the bets are likely to rely as much on moods and feelings as
on science. To approve on hunch-centric betting, we might come up with a betting system.
A system is a logical method that defines a series of bets. The advantages of a betting
system over a hunch method are 1. We don't need an operator. 2. The betting becomes regular,
predictable, and consistent, and, very importantly, 3. We can perform a historical simulation on
a computer to optimize the betting system. Despite almost universal agreement that a system
offers clear advantage over hunches, very few risk managers actually have a definition
of their own risk management systems that is clear enough to allow a computer to backtest
it. Our coin flip game, however, is fairly simple and we can come up with some betting
systems for it. Furthermore, we can test these systems and optimize the system parameters
to find good risk management. Fixed Bet and Fixed Fraction Bet
Our betting system must define the bet. One way to define the bet is to make it a constant
fixed amount, say $10 each time, no matter how much we win or lose. This is a fixed bet
system. In this case, as in fixed betting systems in general, our $1,000 equity might
increase or decrease to the point where the $10 fixed bet becomes proportionately too large
or small to be a good bet. To remedy this problem of the equity drifting
out of proportion to the fixed bet, we might define the bet as a fixed fraction of our
equity. A 1% fixed fraction bet would, on our original $1,000, also lead to a $10 bet.
This time, however, as our equity rises and falls, our fixed fraction bet stays in proportion
to our equity. One interesting artifact of fixed fraction
betting is that, since the bet stays proportional to the equity, it is theoretically impossible
to go entirely broke, so the official risk of total ruin is zero. In actual practice,
however, the disintegration of an enterprise has more to do with the psychological uncle
point, which we'll define later. Simulations. In order to test our betting system, we can
simulate over a historical record of outcomes. Let's say we toss the coin ten times and
we come up with five heads and five tails. We can arrange the simulation in a table
such as figure 24.2 in the supplemental PDF.
Pyramiding and Martingale. In the case of a random process, such as coin
tosses, streaks of heads or tails do occur, since it would be quite improbable to have
a regular alternation of heads and tails. There is, however, no way to exploit this
phenomenon, which is, itself, random. In non-random processes, such as secular trends
and stock prices, pyramiding and other trend trading techniques may be effective.
Pyramiding is a method for increasing a position as it becomes profitable. While this technique
might be useful as a way for a trader to pyramid up to his optimal position, pyramiding on
top of an already optimal position is to invite the disaster of over-trading. In general,
such micro-tinkering with executions is far less important than sticking to the system.
To the extent that tinkering allows a window for further interpreting trading signals,
we can invite hunch trading and weaken the fabric that supports sticking to the system.
The Martingale system is a method for doubling up on losing bets. In case the double bet
loses, the method redoubles and so on. This method is like trying to take nickels
from in front of a steamroller. Eventually, one losing streak flattens the account.
Optimizing, using simulation. Once we select a betting system, say, the fixed fraction
betting system, we can then optimize the system by finding the parameters that yield the best
expected value. In the coin toss case, our only parameter is the fixed fraction. Again,
we can get our answers by simulation. See figures 24.3 and 24.4 in the supplemental
PDF. Note, the coin toss example intends to illuminate
some of the elements of risk and their interrelationships. It specifically applies to a coin that pays
two to one with a 50% chance of either heads or tails in which an equal number of heads
and tails appears. It does not consider the case in which the numbers of heads and tails
are unequal or in which the heads and tails bunch up to create winning and losing streaks.
It does not suggest any particular risk parameters for trading the markets.
Optimizing, using calculus. Since our coin flip game is relatively simple,
we can also find the optimal bet fraction using calculus. Since we know that the bet
system becomes apparent after only one head tail cycle, we can simplify the problem to
solving for just one of the head tail pairs. The stake after one pair of flips equals
the quantity one plus B, the bet fraction, times P, the payoff from winning two to one
odds, times the quantity of one minus B, the bet fraction, times S sub zero, the stake before
the pair of flips. So, the effective return R of one pair of
flips is R, effective return, equals the stake after one pair of flips divided by the stake
before the pair of flips, effective return equals, effective the winning flip times the
effect of the losing flip, effective return equals one minus B plus B times P minus B
squared times P, effective return equals one plus B times the quantity of P minus one then
minus B squared P. Note how for small values of B, R increases
with B times P minus one, and how for large values of B, R decreases with B squared times
P. These are the mathematical formulations of
the timid and bold trader rules. We can plot R versus B to get a graph that
looks similar to the one we get by simulation above, and just pick out the maximum point
by inspection. We can also notice that at the maximum, the slope is zero, so we can
also solve for the maximum by taking the slope and setting it equal to zero.
Slope equals the change of effective return over the change in bet fraction which equals
the quantity of P minus one minus twice B times P which equals zero. Therefore, the bet
fraction equals the quantity of P minus one divided by twice P and for P equaling two
to one odds. The bet fraction equals two minus one divided by two times two which equals
point two five. So, the optimal bet, as before, is twenty-five
percent of equity. Optimizing, using the Kelly formula.
L. Kelly's seminal paper, A New Interpretation of Information Rate, 1956, examines ways
to send data over telephone lines. One part of his work, the Kelly formula, also applies
to trading to optimize bet size. The Kelly formula.
Fraction of capital for next trade equals the historical win ratio minus the quantity
of one minus the historical win ratio divided by the winning payoff rate.
For example, say a coin pays two to one with fifty-fifty chance of heads or tails.
Then K equals point five minus one minus point five divided by two equals point five
minus point two five equals point two five. Kelly indicates the optimal fixed fraction
bet is twenty-five percent. For a visual, see figure twenty-four point
five in the supplemental PDF. For some graphic relationships between luck,
payoff and optimal bet fraction, see figure twenty-four point six in the supplemental
PDF. Non-balanced distributions and high payoffs.
So far, we view risk management from the assumption that, over the long run, heads and tails
for a fifty-fifty coin will even out. Occasionally, however, a winning streak does occur. If the
payoff is higher than two to one for a balanced coin, the expected value, allowing
for winning streaks, reaches a maximum for a bet-it-all strategy.
For example, for a three to one payoff, each toss yields an expected value of payoff times
probability of one point zero. Therefore, the expected value for ten tosses
is one thousand dollars times one plus one to the tenth power, or about one million
twenty-four thousand dollars. This surpasses by far the expected value
of about four thousand two hundred dollars from optimizing a three to one coin to about
a thirty-five percent bet fraction, with the assumption of an equal distribution of
heads and tails. Almost certain death strategies.
Bet-it-all strategies are, by nature, almost certain death strategies. Since the chance
of survival for a fifty-fifty coin equals point five to the power of n, where n is
the number of tosses, after ten tosses, the chance of survival is point five to the tenth
power, or about one chance in one thousand. Since most traders do not wish to go broke,
they are unwilling to adopt such a strategy. Still, the expected value of the process is
very attractive, so we would expect to find the system in use in cases where death carries
no particular penalty other than loss of assets.
For example, a general, managing dispensable soldiers, might seek to optimize his overall
strategy by sending them all over the hill with instructions to charge forward fully,
disregarding personal safety. While the general might expect to lose many of his soldiers
by this tactic, the probabilities indicate that one or two of them might be able to
reach the target, and so maximize the overall expected value of the mission. Likewise, a
portfolio manager might divide his equity into various sub-accounts. He might then risk
one hundred percent of each sub-account, thinking that while he might lose many of them, a few
would win enough, so the overall expected value would maximize. This, the principle
of diversification, works in cases where the individual payoffs are high.
Diversification Diversification is a strategy to distribute
investments among different securities in order to limit losses in the event of a fall
in a particular security. The strategy relies on the average security having a profitable
expected value or luck payoff product. Diversification also offers some psychological benefits to
single instrument trading, since some of the short-term variation in one instrument may
cancel out that from another instrument and result in an overall smoothing of short-term
portfolio volatility. The Uncle Point From the standpoint of a diversified portfolio,
the individual component instruments subsume into the overall performance. The performance
of the fund then becomes the focus of attention, for the risk manager and for the customers
of the fund. The fund performance then becomes subject to the same kinds of feelings, attitudes
and management approaches that investors apply to individual stocks. In particular, one of
the most important and perhaps under-acknowledged dimensions of fund management is the Uncle
Point, or the amount of drawdown that provokes a loss of confidence in either the investors
or the fund management. If either the investors or the managers become demoralized and withdraw
from the enterprise, then the fund dies. Since the circumstances surrounding the Uncle
Point are generally disheartening, it seems to receive, unfortunately, little attention
in the literature. In particular, at the initial point of sale of the fund, the Uncle Point
typically receives little mention, aside from the requisite and rather obscure notice in
associated regulatory documentation. This is unfortunate, since a mismatch in the understanding
of the Uncle Point between the investors and the management can lead to one or the
other giving up, just when the other needs reassurance and reinforcement of commitment.
In times of stress, investors and managers do not access obscure legal agreements, they
access their primal gut feelings. This is particularly important in high-performance,
high-volatility trading, where drawdowns are a frequent aspect of the enterprise. Without
conscious agreement on an Uncle Point, risk managers typically must assume, by default
to safety, that the Uncle Point is rather close, and so they seek ways to keep the
volatility low. As we have seen above, safe, low-volatility systems rarely provide the
highest returns. Still, pressures and tensions from the default expectations of low-volatility
performance create a demand for measurements to detect and penalize volatility.
Measuring Portfolio Volatility, Sharp, Var, Lake Ratio, and Stress Testing
From the standpoint of the diversified portfolio, the individual components merge and become
part of the overall performance. Portfolio managers rely on measurement systems to determine
the performance of the aggregate fund, such as the Sharp Ratio, Var, Lake Ratio, and
Stress Testing. William Sharp, in 1966, creates his Reward to Variability Ratio. Over
time it comes to be known as the Sharp Ratio. The Sharp Ratio, S, provides a way
to compare instruments with different performances and different volatilities by adjusting the
performances for volatilities. The Sharp Ratio, S, equals the mean of D divided by the standard
deviation of D. The Sharp Ratio, where differential return, D, equals the return of the fund,
Rf, minus the return of the benchmark, Rb. The differential return, and where Rf is
returned from the fund, Rb, returned from a benchmark. Various variations of the Sharp
Ratio appear over time. One variation leaves out the benchmark term or sets it to zero.
Another, basically the square of the Sharp Ratio, includes the variance of the returns
rather than the standard deviation. One of the considerations about using the Sharp Ratio
is that it does not distinguish between upside and downside volatility. So high
leverage slash high performance systems that seek high upside volatility do not appear favorably.
VAR, or Value at Risk, is another current popular way to determine portfolio risk. Typically it
measures the highest percentage drawdown that is expected to occur over a given time period,
with 95% chance. The drawbacks to relying on VAR are that one, historical computations can
produce only rough approximations of forward volatility, and two, there is still a 5% chance
that the percentage drawdown will still exceed the expectation. Since the most severe drawdown
problems, loss of confidence by investors and managers, occur during these outlier events,
VAR does not really address or even predict the very scenarios it purports to remedy.
A rule of thumb way to view high volatility accounts by this author is the Lake Ratio.
If we display performance as a graph over time with peaks and valleys, we can visualize rain
falling on a mountain range, filling in all the valleys. This produces a series of lakes
between peaks. In case the portfolio is not at an all-time high, we also erect a dam back
up to the all-time high at the far right to collect all the water from the previous high
point to a final artificial lake. The total volume of water represents the integral product
of drawdown magnitude and drawdown duration. If we divide the total volume of water by
the volume of the earth below it, we have the Lake Ratio. The rate of return divided
by the Lake Ratio gives another measure of volatility normal return. Savings accounts and
other instruments that do not present drawdowns do not collect lakes, so their lake-adjusted
returns can be infinite.
Stress testing is a process of subjecting a model of the trading and risk management
system to historical data and noticing the historical performance with special attention
to the drawdowns. The difficulty with this approach is that few risk managers have a
conscious model of their systems, so few can translate their actual trading systems
to computer code. Where this is possible, however, it provides three substantial benefits. One,
a framework within which to determine optimal bet sizing strategies. Two, a high level of
confidence that the systems are logical, stable, and efficacious. And three, an exhibit to
support discussions to bring the risk-reward expectations of the fund managers and the
investors into alignment. The length of historical data sample for the test is likely adequate
if shortening the length by a third or more has no appreciable effect on the results.
Portfolio selection. During market cycles, individual stocks exhibit wide variations
in behavior. Some rise 100 times while others fall to 1% of their peak values. Indicators
such as the DJIA, the S&P Index, the NASDAQ, and the Russell have wide variations from
each other, further indicating the importance of portfolio selection. A portfolio of the best
performing stocks easily outperforms a portfolio of the worst performing stocks. In this regard,
the methods for selecting the trading portfolio contribute critically to overall performance
and the methodology to select instruments properly belongs in the back-testing methods.
The number of instruments in a portfolio also affects performance. A small number of instruments
produces volatile, occasionally very profitable performance, while a large number of instruments
produces less volatile and more stable, although lower returns.
Position sizing. Some position sizing strategies consider value, others risk. Say, a million
dollar account intends to trade 20 instruments and that the investor is willing to risk 10%
of the account. Value basis position sizing divides the account into 20 equal sub-accounts
of $50,000 each, one for each stock. Since stocks have different prices, the number of
shares for various stocks varies. Risk basis position sizing considers the risk
for each stock, where risk is the entry price minus the stop-out point. It divides the total
risk allowance, say 10% or $100,000, into 20 sub-accounts, each risking $5,000. Dividing
the risk allowance, $5,000, by the risk per share gives the number of shares. Note that
since risk per share may not be proportional to price per share, compare stocks B and
C in the graphic found in the supplemental PDF. The two methods may not indicate the
same number of shares. For very close stops and for a high risk allowance, the number of
shares indicating under risk basis sizing may even exceed the purchasing power of the
account. Psychological considerations. In actual practice, the most important psychological
consideration is ability to stick to the system. To achieve this, it is important, one,
to fully understand the system rules, two, to know how the system behaves, and three,
to have clear and supportive agreements between all parties that support sticking to the system.
For example, as we noticed earlier, profits and losses do not likely alternate with smooth
regularity. They appear, typically, as winning and losing streaks. When the entire investor
manager team realizes this as natural, it is more likely to stay the course during
drawdowns and also to stay appropriately modest during winning streaks. In addition,
seminars, support groups, and other forms of attitude maintenance can help keep essential
agreements on track throughout the organization. Risk management. Summary. In general, good
risk management combines several elements. One, clarifying trading and risk management
systems until they can translate to computer code. Two, inclusion of diversification and
instrument selection into the back testing process. Three, back testing and stress testing
to determine trading parameter sensitivity and optimal values. Four, clear agreement
of all parties on expectation of volatility and return. Five, maintenance of supportive
relationships between investors and managers. Six, above all, stick to the system. Seven,
see number six above.


# Chapter 47

Chapter 25. How to Grab a Bargain Trading Futures. Maybe.
Mark Sleeman. Introduction. My name is Mark Sleeman. I live in Auckland, New Zealand,
and am the sole principal of CTA firm MS Capital Management Limited.
The next few pages detail a research project I originally undertook in conjunction with Ed
Dakota in 2009 to contribute to the research on his Trading Tribe website, www.sakota.com.
This is an updated version, September 2016. It has similar findings as the original version,
but utilizes more up-to-date examples of market action to illustrate its points. The project
creates and tests a computerized trading system that buys retracements and sells rallies,
the opposite of how common trend-following systems work. While I know that the buy-low,
sell-high approach feels good to many traders, I wish to find out if it is actually profitable
when subject to rigorous testing. How to Grab a Bargain Trading Futures.
I love to grab a bargain. The problem is my trend-following system, like all trend-following
systems, doesn't. It waits around until it sees a new uptrend, and only then does
it buy. Invariably, the buy signal comes long after the bottom. I find this extremely frustrating,
and often wonder if it is possible to build a system that buys the bottoms and sells
the tops. Following trends is hard work.
It is early January 2016, and I am watching the E-Mini S&P 500 Futures fall sharply against
a background of plummeting oil prices and fears of a slowdown in China. Down and down
the price goes. By January 20, it is at the August-September 2015 support level, and I
am thinking to myself, this is cheap, I can jump in here and grab myself a bargain.
I really want to buy. But my boring old trend-following system says, stay out. Prices jiggle sideways
for a few weeks, then suddenly turn around and head up. Each day the market rallies,
and each day I feel a growing knot in the pit of my stomach as I replay the situation
over and over, only with me happily holding a long position, rather than watching hopelessly
from the sidelines. As the price swiftly rises, my feelings of anger and frustration
rise with it. But I listen to my system and do nothing. The price continues to rally.
By early April, the price is no longer a bargain. It is back up to resistance levels
and looks expensive. I no longer want to buy. I want to sell short. But what does
my system do? It signals a buy. Reluctantly I take the trade.
Initially the market rallies for a few days, but then it starts to fall. Down and down
it goes. It is as if they know I am finally long. I watch my losses mount. The knot in
my stomach a few days ago is nothing compared to what I am feeling now. I curse myself
and my system for buying at the top. Eventually prices are looking cheap again. But is my
system buying? No, it is selling. The trade is hitting its stop-loss point, and it is
time to get out. Of course, prices then immediately rally again to new highs, and
my system goes long again. On June 24th, the shock result of the Brexit vote sends
prices into freefall. A heaven-sent opportunity to buy. What does my system do? It sells out.
This happens one more time, with the system exiting on the big down day of September 9th.
I feel like an idiot. I seem to always be buying high and selling low. It is a zero-sum
game, right? Someone must be making all the money that I am losing, but who? Who takes
the money out of these markets? On reflection, I figure it must be the pros. I am sick of
throwing my money away. It is time for me to figure out how the pros trade. Then I
can start trading like they do. Figuring out how the pros do it.
Just how do the pros do it? I think about how smart operators succeed in other businesses.
Then I remember the old adage that to sell right, you must first buy right. That's it.
That must be how the pros trade. Not for them this silly game of buying at highs. I figure
they wait patiently for bargains, and then pounce. All they have to do, then, is wait
for the subsequent rally and sell. They can do this time and time again. And who
are they selling to at the tops and buying from at the bottoms? The sucker trend followers,
of course, just like me. A computer model of the pros.
I decide to prove my theory by creating a computerized system that models my vision
of how the pros trade. I design it to buy when prices are cheap and sell when they are
expensive. I call this the GRAB, grab, grab a bargain, system. I know that markets do have
trends and I don't want to fight them, so I include the discipline of only trading in the
direction of the prevailing major trend. That is, when the major trend is up,
the system trades from the long side only, buying on the short-term weakness and exiting
on strength. When the major trend is down, it trades from the short side only, selling
on short-term rallies and covering on weakness. I figure I now have the key to successful trading,
so I set about building the system, feeling a rosy glow as I imagine how I am going to
spend the inevitable profits. This system should pick up the bargains with regularity,
then sell, just as the trend followers are getting in. The inevitable whipsaws,
which normally cause me pain, are no longer a problem. Rather, they are a source of profit.
The GRAB system is complete. To run, it requires two values, parameters,
which are simply the number of days the system looks back to determine support and resistance
levels. See, grab trading system details in the supplemental PDF. I set about optimizing
these parameters. With experimentation, I find values that allow the system to pick
off the highs and lows just as I wish. This looks great. Now, the GRAB system is ready
for back-testing. I am eager to see just how well this system performs. I select a diversified
portfolio of 40 futures markets and 30 years of price history. I run the computer test and wait
impatiently for the results. A terrible discovery. When I run the system, in addition to finding it
buys dips and sells rallies, as I expect, I notice something else that makes my blood freeze.
Despite the pro-trading strategy, this system does not make money. It loses money. I am
flabbergasted. Far from being the money machine I imagine, this system looks like a path to the
poorhouse. To confirm the initial findings, I run many more tests. The results are conclusive.
The GRAB system is a loser. I do not understand this mystery. How can something that looks so good
lose money? Solving the mystery. Why does the GRAB system lose? Clearly, the GRAB system is
not always picking off the highs and lows as I hope. As I investigate further, I see that the
system behavior is highly dependent on the fit between the parameter values and the price
action. Often, it is out of sync with the market. If the parameters are even slightly out of sync
with the price action, the system no longer works as I want. It either enters too early or not at
all. When it enters too early, the position loses as it rides the reaction down, often exiting just
before the bottom and completely missing the subsequent move up. Often this happens
several times in succession in a similar fashion to a trend following system suffering a series of
whipsaw losses. Worse still, it misses the best moves. However, it is the case of the system not
entering at all that really degrades the performance. The GRAB system relies on reactions
against the trend to enter a move. However, the strongest trends often have the smallest
reactions. If these reactions are too small, the GRAB system is not able to enter. Even if it does
manage to enter the move once or twice, it quickly exits again on strength. Therefore,
the GRAB system requires a series of substantial reactions to have any chance of catching a
significant portion of a large move. The strongest moves often do not have deep enough reactions to
allow this system to get on board, leaving it in the dust as the price rockets skywards. Note how,
during the massive 2014 rally and bond prices, the GRAB system completely misses the move up
in Euro-German Bund prices. The enormous profits it misses out on in this case,
and many others like it, wreck the system performance. The GRAB system only works well
during the rare times that its parameters are in sync with the market action. The rest of the
time it either miss times the reactions or fails to get aboard the large moves,
missing out on huge profits as it sits on the sidelines. Maybe being profitable means being
uncomfortable? These results shatter my daydreams of systematically picking up bargains in the
futures markets. The strategy of buying cheap and selling when prices look expensive feels good to
me and, I expect, to many other people. But when I test it on computer, it is clearly a loser.
In contrast, I often feel uncomfortable operating my trend following system with its strategy of
buying at highs and selling at lows. But the big difference is that it is generally profitable.
It appears that in futures trading, like other endeavors, profits do not come easily because
they require the trader to absolutely stick to a system that is sometimes very difficult to follow.
GRAB trading system details. The objective of this system is to buy weakness and sell
strength while using the discipline of always trading in the same direction as the major
trend. The GRAB system uses a two-box look-back strategy. Support and resistance are defined as
the lowest low and the highest high for the past N days for both a near box and a far box,
given that N near is less than N far. When the price trades above far box resistance,
it defines the major trend as up. The major trend remains up until the price trades below
far box support, which defines the major trend as down. When the major trend is up,
the system trades for the long side only. When the major trend is down, it trades from the
short side only. Buys on break of support sells on break of resistance. Thus far,
the system is similar to a support resistance trend following system. The difference is that,
within a major uptrend, grab buys weakness and sells strength. In a downtrend, the procedure
reverses. When the major trend is up, the system buys, during a reaction, on a break of near box
support and sells, during a rally, on a break of near box resistance, using limit orders. It
keeps doing this until, rather than rallying to near box resistance, prices break below far box
support, at which point the major trend definition changes to down and the position exits, on a stop.
The system is then ready to trade short by selling on a break of near box resistance. See
grab trading system code in the supplemental PDF for the code behind the grab system. The grab
system is inherently different to standard trend following systems, which buy strength and sell
weakness. At first glance, I think it should generate a number of small profits from trading
within the trend, followed by a larger loss as the trend reverses. This likely has the effect of
increasing the win-loss rate over that of a trend following system, while reducing the average win
average loss ratio. I also believe the slippage costs should be smaller, as a result of much
of the trading executing via limit orders, rather than the stop orders trend following systems
use. Testing reveals some behavior I do not expect. In back testing, I find some things I
do not expect. The following assumes the trend is up. One, sometimes the near box and far box
support levels are the same. This happens more often when the two parameter values are close
together. In these cases, the system wants to buy, enter, and sell exit at the same price.
I can see that the back test does not enter these trades. This is a reasonable approximation
of actual trading, as the trader can cancel both orders, rather than send them to the broker.
Two, a losing trade does not accompany every major trend reversal, as not all trend reversal
trades enter, see one above. Three, not all of the trades within the major trend are profitable.
Sometimes the exit level, near box resistance, moves below the entry level during the life
of the trade. This is more likely to occur when the near and far box parameters are further
apart. Four, it is possible, although unlikely, that a position exit that occurs on a major
trend change, break of far box support, is actually profitable. This occurs when the
far box support moves above the entry price during the life of the trade. This is more
likely to occur when the parameters are close together.
Difference between parameter values defines character of grab system. The distance between
the parameters defines the character of the grab system. When the parameters are far apart,
only a small reaction against the major trend breaks near box support, and triggers an
entry. Similarly, only a small, profitable move breaks near box resistance, and triggers
the exit. Conversely, the system requires a large losing move to break far box support
and signal a major trend change from up to down. This produces frequent trading, with
many small wins and a few large losses. This may appeal to a trader's desire to be right.
When the parameters are close together, the grab system requires a large reaction against
the major trend to enter a position, hence trading is less frequent. Once in a position,
the system requires a large, profitable move to reach near box resistance, and trigger
an exit. Conversely, it requires only a small losing move to break far box support and trigger
a trend change exit. This configuration skips many of the trend change trades as in one
above. This produces infrequent trading, with few winners. However, the trades that do win
enter very near the bottom of the reaction and exit near the top of the ensuing move.
This may appeal to a trader's desire to be smart.
Grab Trading System Code The code for the grab system in a semi-English
format may be found in the supplemental PDF. An apostrophe at the beginning of a line denotes
a comment.


# Chapter 48

Chapter 26. Why Tactical Macro-Investing Still Makes Sense.
Jason Gerlach, Rick Slaughter, Chris Stanton.
Sunrise Capital Partners.
Introduction.
In November 2002, Cass Business School professor Harry M. Catt, Ph.D.,
began to circulate a working paper entitled,
Managed Futures and Hedge Funds, A Match Made in Heaven.
The Journal of Investment Management subsequently published the paper
in the first quarter of 2004.
We consider Dr. Catt's paper to be one of the seminal works
on the tactical macro-investing or managed futures space.
In the paper, Catt noted that while adding hedge fund exposure
to traditional portfolios of stocks and bonds, increased returns,
and reduced volatility, it also produced an undesirable side effect,
increased tail risk, lower skew, and higher kurtosis.
He went on to analyze the effect of adding managed futures
to the traditional portfolios, and then of combining hedge funds
and managed futures, and finally the effect of adding both hedge funds
and managed futures to the traditional portfolios.
He found that managed futures were better diversifiers than hedge funds,
that managed futures reduced the portfolio's volatility
to a greater degree and more quickly than did hedge funds,
and that managed futures achieved this without the negative side effect
of increased tail risk.
He concluded that the most desirable results were obtained
by combining both managed futures and hedge funds
with the traditional portfolios.
Catt's original period of study was June 1994 to May 2001.
In our paper, we revisit and update Catt's original work.
Hence, our primary period of study is the out-of-sample period since then,
which is January 2001 to December 2015.
In two appendices, we also include our findings for two other periods.
Due to the availability of the data and our choice of it,
in Appendix A, we share our results for the entire period from 1990 to 2015.
This encompasses the almost four and a half years prior to Catt's original study period,
and the out-of-sample period since then.
In Appendix B, we share our results for the exact same period that Catt studied in his paper,
June 1994 to 2001.
It is important to note that our paper in general, and Appendix B specifically,
is not meant to be an exact replication of Catt's original work.
Managed Futures
Managed futures may be thought of as a collection of liquid, transparent, tactical, macro hedge fund strategies
which focus on exchange traded futures, forwards, options, and foreign exchange markets.
Trading programs take both long and short positions in as many as 400 globally diversified markets,
spanning physical commodities, fixed income, equity indices, and currencies.
Daily participants in these markets include hedgers, traders, and investors,
many of whom make frequent adjustments to their positions,
contributing to substantial trading volume and plentiful liquidity.
These conditions allow most managed futures programs to accommodate large capacity
and provide the opportunity to diversify across many different markets, sectors, and time horizons.
Diversification across market sectors, active management,
and the ability to take long and short positions are key features that differentiate managed futures strategies
not only from passive, long-only commodity indices, but from traditional investing as well.
Although most managed futures programs trade equity index, fixed income, and foreign exchange futures,
their returns have historically been uncorrelated to the returns of these asset classes.
The reason for this is that most managers are not simply taking on systematic beta exposure to an asset class,
but are attempting to add alpha through active tactical management
and the freedom to enter short or spread positions, tactics which offer the potential
for completely different return profiles than long-only passive indices.
Early stories of futures trading can be traced as far back as the late 1600s in Japan,
although the first public futures fund started trading in 1948,
the industry did not gain traction until the 1970s.
According to Barclays, 2012,
a decade or more ago, these managers and their products may have been considered different than hedge funds.
They are now usually viewed as a distinct strategy or group of strategies within the broader hedge fund universe.
In fact, managed futures represent an important part of the alternative investment landscape.
Commanding approximately 12% of all hedge fund assets, which equated to $333.4 billion at the end of Q3 2015.
Managed futures can be thought of as a subset of global macro strategies
that focuses on global futures and foreign exchange markets
and is likely to utilize a highly tactical, systematic approach to trading and risk management.
The instruments that are traded tend to be exchange-listed futures
or extremely deep, liquid, cash-forward markets.
Futures facilitate pricing and valuation and minimize credit risk through daily settlement,
enabling hedge fund investors to mitigate or eliminate some of the more deleterious risks associated with investing in alternatives.
Liquidity and ease of pricing also assist risk management by making risks easier to measure and model.
In research conducted before the global financial crisis,
Baduri and Art found that the value of liquidity is often underestimated
and, as a result, hedge funds that trade illiquid instruments
have underperformed hedge funds that have better liquidity terms.
The quantitative nature of many managed futures strategies
makes it easy for casual observers to mistakenly categorize them as black-box trading systems.
According to Ramsey & Kins, the irony is that most CTAs will provide uncommonly high levels of transparency
relative to other alternative investment strategies.
They go on to suggest that CTAs are generally willing to describe their trading models
and the risk management in substantial detail during the course of due diligence
short of revealing their actual algorithms.
CTAs are also typically willing to share substantial position transparency with fund investors.
Through managed accounts, investors achieve real-time, full transparency of positions
and avoid certain custodial risks associated with fund investments.
Ramsey & Kins conclude that
it is difficult to call CTAs black-box considering they disclose their methodology
and provide full-position transparency so that investors can verify adherence to that methodology.
Separately managed accounts, common among managed futures investors,
greatly enhance risk management by providing the investor with full transparency
and, in extreme cases, the ability to intervene by liquidating or neutralizing positions.
In addition, institutional investors who access CTAs via separately managed accounts
substantially reduce operational risks and the possibility of fraud by maintaining custody of assets.
Unlike the products traded in other hedge fund strategies,
those traded by CTAs allow investors to customize the allocation
by targeting a specific level of risk through the use of notional funding.
The cash efficiency made possible by the low margin requirements of futures and foreign exchange
allows investors to work with the trading manager to lever or de-lever a managed account
to target a specific level of annualized volatility or other risk metric.
Some CTAs offer funds with share classes with different levels of risk.
Unlike traditional forms of leverage, which require the investor to pay interest to gain additional exposure,
assets used for margin in futures accounts can earn interest for the investor.
Another advantage of trading futures is that there are no barriers to short selling.
Two parties simply enter into a contract, there is no uptick rule,
there is no need to borrow shares, pay dividends or incur other costs associated with entering into equity short sales.
Thus, it is easier to implement a long short strategy via futures than it is using equities.
Defining Managed Futures and CTAs
Managed futures is an extremely broad term that requires a more specific definition.
Managed futures traders are commonly referred to as Commodity Trading Advisors or CTAs,
a designation which refers to a manager's registration status with the Commodity Futures Trading Commission
and National Futures Association.
CTAs may trade financial and foreign exchange futures,
so the Commodity Trading Advisor registration is somewhat misleading,
since CTAs are not restricted to trading only commodity futures,
where institutional investors position managed futures and CTAs.
According to a survey in the Barclays February 2012 Hedge Fund Pulse Report,
institutional investors view the top three key benefits of investing in CTAs as
1. Low correlation to traditional return sources
2. The risk mitigation slash portfolio diversifying characteristics of the strategy
3. The absolute return component of the strategy and its attributes as a source of alpha
Also, 50% of the investors surveyed have between 0 to 10% of their current hedge fund portfolio
allocated to CTA strategies, and 50% of investors surveyed plan to increase their allocations
to the strategy in the next six months.
Skewness and Kurtosis
When building portfolios using the Modern Portfolio Theory MPT framework,
investors focus almost solely on the first two moments of the distribution, mean and variance.
The typical MPT method of building portfolios appears to work well as long as historical
returns between asset classes remain stable. But in times of crisis, asset classes often
move in lockstep, and investors who thought they were diversified experience severe tail-risk
events. By only focusing on mean return and variance, investors may not be factoring in
important, measurable, and historically robust information. Skewness and Kurtosis,
the third and fourth moments of the distribution, can offer vital information about the
real-world return characteristics of asset classes and investment strategies.
The concepts of skewness and kurtosis are paramount to this study.
Skewness is a measure of symmetry and compares the length of the two tails of a distribution curve.
Kurtosis is a measure of the peakedness of a distribution. That is, do the outcomes
produce a tall and skinny, or short and squat curve? In other words, is the volatility
risk located in the tails of the distribution, or clustered in the middle?
To understand how vital these concepts are to the results of this study, we revisit
CAT's original work. CAT states that when past returns are extrapolated and risk is
defined as standard deviation, hedge funds do indeed provide investors with the best
of both worlds, an expected return similar to equities, but risk similar to that of bonds.
However, a man in CAT showed that including hedge funds in a traditional investment
portfolio may significantly improve the portfolio's mean variance characteristics.
But during crisis periods, hedge funds can also be expected to produce a more negatively
skewed distribution. CAT adds, the additional negative skewness that arises when
hedge funds are introduced to a portfolio of stocks and bonds forms a major risk,
as one large negative return can destroy years of careful compounding.
CAT's finding appears to be substantiated in Collogean and Ziquianiank, which
evaluates the risk of disproportionate losses relative to volatility and various
hedge fund strategies. Negatively skewed strategies are only attractive during
stable market conditions, during market shocks, for example, the three largest S&P
500 drawdowns in the past 17 years. Low-skew strategies display outsized losses
of negative 41 percent versus gains of 39 percent for high-skew strategies,
increases in correlation to the S&P 500, and increases in correlation to each
other. Skewness and cortosis may convey critical information about portfolio risk
and return characteristics, something that should be kept in mind when reading
this study. A more thorough review of skewness and cortosis can be found in
Appendix C. Data
Like CAT, our analysis focuses upon four asset classes, stocks, bonds, hedge funds
and managed futures. Stocks, represented by the S&P 500 total return index.
The S&P 500 has been widely regarded as the most representative gauge of the
large-cap U.S. equities market since the index was first published in 1957.
The index has over 7.8 trillion benchmarked against it, with index replication
strategies comprising approximately $2.2 trillion of this total. The index includes
500 leading companies and leading industries of the U.S. economy, capturing 80 percent
of the capitalization of equities. The S&P 500 total return index reflects
both changes in the prices of stocks, as well as the reinvestment of the dividend
income from the underlying constituents. Bonds
Represented by the Barclays U.S. Aggregate Bond Index, formerly the Lehman
Aggregate Bond Index, it was created in 1986 with backdated history to 1976.
The index is the dominant index for U.S. bond investors and is a benchmark
index for many U.S. index funds. The index is a composite of four major sub
indexes, the U.S. Government Index, the U.S. Credit Index, the U.S. Mortgage
Backed Securities Index, 1986, and, beginning in 1992, the U.S. Asset
Backed Securities Index. The index tracks investment quality bonds based
on S&P, Moody and Fitch bond ratings. The index does not include high-yield
bonds, inflation-indexed treasury bonds, or foreign currency bonds. As of late
2015, the index is comprised of about 8,200 bond issues.
Hedge Funds. Represented by the HFRI Fund Weighted Composite Index, which
includes over 2,300 constituent hedge funds, it is an equal weighted index
that includes both domestic and offshore funds, but no funds of funds.
Report in U.S. dollars and report net of all fees on a monthly basis. The
funds must have at least $50 million under management or have been actively
trading for at least 12 months. Managed Futures. Represented by the
Barclays Systematic Traders Index, this index is an equal weighted composite
of managed programs whose approach is at least 95% systematic. Closing 2015,
these are the two programs included in the index.
Basic Statistics. The basic performance statistics for our four asset classes
are shown in Table 26.1 in the Supplemental PDF. Similar to CAT's results,
but to a much lesser extent, our results show that Managed Futures have a
lower mean return than Hedge Funds. Managed Futures also have a higher
deviation. However, they exhibit positive instead of negative skewness and
much lower kurtosis. This is a critical point. The lower kurtosis conveys
that less of the standard deviation is coming from the tails, lower tail
risk, and the positive skewness indicates a tendency for upside surprises,
not downside. From the correlation matrix, we see that hedge funds are
highly correlated to stocks, 0.8. Managed Futures are somewhat negatively
correlated to stocks, negative 0.17, and the correlation between Managed
Futures and Hedge Funds is low, 0.07. Stocks, bonds, plus hedge funds or
Managed Futures. In order to study the effect of allocating to hedge funds
and Managed Futures, we form a baseline, traditional portfolio that is 50%
stocks and 50% bonds, 50-50. We then begin adding hedge funds or
Managed Futures in 5% allocation increments. As in Kat's original paper,
when adding in Hedge Funds or Managed Futures, the original 50-50 portfolio
will reduce its stock and bond holdings proportionally. This produces
portfolios such as 40% stocks, 40% bonds, and 20% hedge funds, or 35%
stocks, 35% bonds, and 30% Managed Futures. Note, all portfolios throughout
the paper are rebalanced monthly. Similar to Kat, we studied the
differences in how hedge funds and Managed Futures combine with stocks
and bonds. Kat found that during the period he studied, adding hedge funds
to the 50-50 portfolio of stocks and bonds lowered the standard deviation,
as hoped for. Unfortunately, hedge funds also increase the negative tilt
of the distribution. In addition to the portfolios becoming more negatively
skewed, the return distribution's kurtosis increased, indicating fatter
tails. However, Kat found that when he increased the Managed Futures
allocation, the standard deviation dropped faster than with hedge funds,
the kurtosis was lowered, and, most impressively, the skewness actually
shifted in a positive direction. See Table 26.2 in the Supplemental PDF.
Kat summarized by saying, Although under the assumptions made, hedge funds
offer a somewhat higher-than-expected return, from an overall risk perspective,
Managed Futures appear to be better diversifiers than hedge funds.
Our results show that Kat's observations have held up during the period since
his original study. When we increased the hedge fund allocation, the portfolio
return went up, and the standard deviation went down. However, the
previously discussed negative side effect of adding hedge funds was present
as the skewness of the portfolio fell and the kurtosis went up. On the
other hand, when we added Managed Futures into the traditional portfolio, we
observed more impressive diversification characteristics. In fact, Managed
Futures appear to have improved the performance profiles even more in this
period compared to the one Kat studied. Adding Managed Futures exposure
increased mean return and simultaneously increased the skewness of negative
0.78 of the traditional portfolio to negative 0.04 at the 45 percent
allocation level. The standard deviation dropped more and faster than it
did with hedge funds, and kurtosis also improved, dropping from 2.27 to
negative 0.18 at the 45 percent allocation level.
Hedge Funds plus Managed Futures
Table 26.3 in the supplemental PDF summarizes the results of combining only
hedge funds and Managed Futures. The mean monthly return from Managed
Futures is lower than hedge funds, so we may expect adding them in will
reduce the expected return of the portfolio. The standard deviation of
Managed Futures is higher than hedge funds, so one might expect upward
pressure on volatility from the addition of Managed Futures. However,
this happens when they are combined. Due to their positive skewness and
significantly lower kurtosis, adding Managed Futures to hedge funds appears
to provide a substantial improvement to the overall risk profile. With 40
percent invested in Managed Futures, the standard deviation drops from
1.72 percent to 1.42 percent, but the expected return only declines by
five basis points. At the same allocation to Managed Futures, skewness
from negative 0.84 to 0.1, while kurtosis drops noticeably from 2.06 to
negative 0.18. Hedge funds are impressive on their own, but Managed
Futures demonstrate that they are the ultimate teammate by improving the
return characteristics of the overall portfolio. Stocks, bonds, hedge funds,
and Managed Futures. The last step in our analysis is to study the
effects of combining all four asset classes in one portfolio. Like CAT, we
accomplish this in two steps. First, we combine hedge funds and Managed
Futures into what we call the Alternatives Portfolio. Next, we combine
this alternative portfolio with increasing amounts of a static 50-50 Stocks
and Bonds traditional portfolio. With this advanced analysis, we are trying to
answer two questions simultaneously. First, what is the best combination of
traditional and alternative investments? See axis in figure 26.1 labeled
percentage in alternatives in the supplemental PDF. And second, what is
the best mix of hedge funds and Managed Futures within the alternatives
portfolio? See axis in figure 26.2 labeled percentage in Managed Futures
in the supplemental PDF. Figure 26.1 shows that the highest mean return
is obtained when the portfolio is not allocated to Managed Futures. Adding
Managed Futures has a downward effect on mean return because its return
is lower, .33% vs. .45% for hedge funds and .46% for Stocks and Bonds.
This is to be expected as Managed Futures firms weigh the minimization
of their standard deviation and drawdown just as heavily into their investment
decisions as they do maximizing their return. Figure 26.2 begins to tell a
more intriguing story. Very similar to Kat's results, we find that adding
alternatives to traditional portfolios of Stocks and Bonds significantly
reduces the portfolio's standard deviation of returns. Note, regarding the
axis labels on the figures, the author selected the viewing angle that
best conveys the information in each figure. Hence, beginning with figure 26.2,
the axis labels are not necessarily consistent with those of other figures.
Moreover, this effect would have historically been optimal at a 100% allocation
to alternatives with 35% of the alternatives portfolio allocated to Managed Futures.
Figure 26.3 in the supplemental PDF shows the results of dividing returns
by standard deviation, a common risk-adjusted return metric. It can be argued
that the amount returned, or in other words, the most upside per unit of risk,
we can see a maximum risk-adjusted return when invested in 100% with about
30% of that in Managed Futures. Figure 26.4 in the supplemental PDF shows
the skewness results from the combined portfolios. We find that adding exposure
to alternatives exerts a desirable upward effect on skewness. In turn, as the
Managed Futures allocation is increased, the positive effect on skewness is
increased. At levels starting at approximately 80% allocation to alternatives,
the skewness of the portfolios actually becomes positive. The highest levels
of skewness were found at a 100% allocation to alternatives with more than
half allocated to Managed Futures. Finally, Figure 26.5 in the supplemental
PDF shows the results as they pertain to kurtosis. Like Kat, we find that
allocation of Managed Futures favorably decreases the portfolio's kurtosis,
and with 95% to 100% allocated to alternatives and 40% to 55% of the
alternatives portfolio allocated to Managed Futures, it actually produces
a negative kurtosis of negative .19. We repeated the analysis above with
several other CTA indices to make sure that our results were not specific
to one index in particular. In all cases, the results were very similar to
what we found above, suggesting that our results are robust irrespective of
the choice of Managed Futures index. Conclusion
In this study, we used the framework introduced by Dr. Harry M. Kat in his
paper, Managed Futures and Hedge Funds, A Match Made in Heaven, to analyze
the possible role of Managed Futures in portfolios of stocks, bonds, and
hedge funds. Our aim with this paper was to discover whether or not Kat's
findings have held up in the years since. Managed Futures have continued
to be very valuable diversifiers. Throughout our analysis, and similar to Kat,
we found that adding Managed Futures to portfolios of stocks and bonds reduced
portfolio standard deviation to a greater degree and more quickly than did
hedge funds alone and without the undesirable side effects of skewness
and kurtosis. The most impressive results were observed when combining both
hedge funds and Managed Futures with portfolios of stocks and bonds.
Figures 26.1 to 26.5 showed that the most desirable levels of mean return,
standard deviation, skewness, and kurtosis, were produced by portfolios
with allocations of 90 to 100 percent to alternatives and 40 to 55 percent
of the alternatives portfolio allocated to Managed Futures. As a finale,
we thought it would be instructive to show performance statistics for
portfolios that combine all four of the asset classes, stocks, bonds, Managed
Futures, and hedge funds. Table 26.4 in the Supplemental PDF shows the
results for portfolios ranging from a 100 percent traditional portfolio,
50 percent stocks, 50 percent bonds, to a 100 percent alternatives portfolio,
50 percent hedge funds, 50 percent Managed Futures, in 10 percent increments.
In Table 26.4 and Figure 26.6 in the Supplemental PDF, an efficient
frontier based on the data in Table 26.4, the benefits of allocating to
alternatives with a sizable percentage allocated to Managed Futures are quite
compelling. As the contribution to alternatives increases, all metrics benefit.
1. Risk-adjusted return increases. 2. Standard deviation decreases.
3. Skewness increases. 4. Kurtosis decreases.
Overall, our analysis is best summarized by the following quote from Dr. Kat,
regarding his own findings almost 10 years ago. Investing in Managed Futures
can improve the overall risk profile of a portfolio far beyond what can be
achieved with hedge funds alone. Making an allocation to Managed Futures not
only neutralizes the unwanted side effects of hedge funds, but also leads
to further risk reduction. Assuming Managed Futures offer an acceptable
expected return, all of this comes at quite a low price in terms of expected
return foregone.
Appendix A. In this appendix we present the results of our analysis via data
tables and graphics in the same format as the main body of the study,
but for the period January 1990 through December 2015, the data we used in
our study, particularly the hedge fund and CTA indices, allowed us to go
back to 1990, almost four and a half years prior to the start of Kat's
study period. Besides analyzing the out-of-sample period since Kat's study
period, we thought analyzing the entire period from 1990 to 2015 would be
both instructive and interesting. See Table A.1 in the Supplemental PDF.
In Table A.2 in the Supplemental PDF, adding Managed Futures to a 50-50
portfolio of stocks and bonds increased the Kurtosis for this period due to
a single data point. In December 1991, Managed Futures produced a 14.49%
return for the month, which substantially increased both the SKU and
Kurtosis for the period. This is a prime example of our concentration that
skewness and kurtosis are connected and should not be analyzed in isolation.
The significantly higher kurtosis, in this case, is due to the significantly
higher SKU caused by one positive outlier, that is, upside volatility, in
December 1991. To help gauge the effect of that one particular data
point, we recalculated the statistics for the period, intentionally
omitting the December 1991 data point. In doing so, we found that at the
50% allocation level to Managed Futures, the skewness of the portfolio
decreased slightly from 0.78 to 0.5, and kurtosis dropped from 1.54 to 1.16.
Said another way, without the effect of the December 1991 data point,
the statistics are more in line with our other two periods of study in
this paper.
Appendix B. In this appendix, we present the results of our analysis via data
tables and graphics in the same format as the main body of this study, but
for the exact same period that Kat studied in his paper, June 1994 to May
2001. It is important to keep in mind that we used different data than Kat.
One, to represent bonds, Kat used a 10-year government bond index while we
used the Barclays U.S. Aggregate Bond Index, formerly the Lehman Aggregate Bond
Index. Two, for hedge funds, Kat used his own methodology to build hedge fund
portfolios with data from Tremont TAS while we used the HFRI Fund Weighted
Composite Index. Three, while we and Kat both used the S&P 500 Total
Return Index to represent stocks, Kat capped his mean return at 1% per
year while we used its exact return stream. Four, for managed futures, Kat used
the Stark 300 Index and we used the Barclays Systematic Traders Index.
After factoring in all of these differences, we were pleasantly surprised
at how closely our results resembled Kat's work from over 10 years ago.
Appendix C. Review of Skewness and Kurtosis. The first four moments that
describe data distributions are one, mean, two, variance, three, skewness, four,
kurtosis. Most investment professionals focus only on the first two moments
and in a theoretical world where investment returns are assumed to be normally
distributed, focusing only on the relationship of returns to volatility may
suffice. However, we know that market returns, and more importantly in this
case, alternative investment returns, are rarely normally distributed. The
dot-com crash and the global financial crisis have left investors wondering
just how often 100-year storms actually occur. Standard measures of risk did
not seem to prepare investors for the extreme nature of the two bear
markets in the first decade of the 2000s. The rapid growth in hedge
funds and other forms of alternative investments resulted in a proliferation
of products with return profiles that did not fit standard definitions of
return and risk described by normal distributions. Although well established
in statistical theory, skewness and kurtosis are often ignored or
misunderstood in performance analysis. This is not surprising, given that
skewness and kurtosis take a bit more effort to understand. It is our
contention that skewness and kurtosis are connected and should not be
analyzed in isolation from one another or other performance statistics.
Skewness
Skewness is a measure of symmetry, or more precisely, lack of symmetry, of a
random variable's probability distribution of returns around the mean.
Stated a different way, skewness compares the length of the two tails of the
distribution curve. If the distribution is impacted more by negative
outliers than positive outliers, or vice versa, the distribution will no
longer be symmetrical. Therefore, skewness tells us how outlier events
impact the shape of the distribution. A positive skew value indicates a
tendency for values to fall below the mean with the tail of the
distribution to the right, a tendency for upside surprises. A negative
skew value indicates a greater chance that values will fall above the
mean, a propensity for downside volatility.
Kurtosis
Kurtosis is a measure of whether a random variable's probability
distribution is tall and skinny, or short and squat, as compared to the
normal distribution of the same variance. It conveys the extent to which
the distribution is dominated by outlier events, those extreme events
distant from the mean. There are differing conventions on how kurtosis
should be scaled. Pearson's original calculation for kurtosis produces a
value of 3.0 for a normal distribution. Therefore, it is common practice to
use an adjusted version called excess kurtosis that subtracts 3.0 from
Pearson's calculation to produce a value of 0.0 for a normal
distribution. Microsoft Excel's kurtosis function, KURT, returns excess
kurtosis. Positive excess kurtosis describes a leptokurtic distribution
with a high peak, thin mid-range, and fat tails, indicating an increased
chance of extreme observations. Negative excess kurtosis describes a
platokurtic distribution with a low peak and fat mid-range on both sides.
Zero excess kurtosis is called mesokurtic, a normally distributed, bell-shaped
curve. Sometimes referred to as the volatility of volatility, kurtosis
conveys where in the distribution the standard deviation resides, not the
overall level of standard deviation.


# Chapter 49

Chapter 27. Kerry and Trend in Lots of Places.
Veneer Bansali, Josh Davis, Matt Dorsten, and Graham Renison.
There is a long history of using yields as the baseline for prospective asset returns for a wide variety of asset classes.
For instance, Cochrane points out that yields predicting future returns is a pervasive phenomenon across markets,
and Leibowitz applies this systematically to various types of bond portfolios.
Kerry is used by practitioners in an analogous way to yield, especially for derivatives markets like futures,
and indeed is more general than yield in that it incorporates the cost of funding the investment.
For fixed income investments, this distinction between yield and Kerry can be important, for instance when yield curves are inverted.
If we decompose the total return of any investment as the sum of returns from change in the underlying pricing factors,
and from the passage of time, then Kerry can be best thought of as the return attributable to the second component,
that is, the expected return from the passage of time.
Kerry is defined by Coyon as the expected return on an asset assuming that market conditions, including its price, stay the same.
Thus, Kerry may be thought of as a naïve yet robust, model-free measure of the risk premium in a given asset class.
In this regard, it is plausible that being on the side of positive Kerry should earn a higher return, on average,
but accepting potentially greater risk, as well since the assumption of static prices is rarely true in practice.
Historically, the literature has focused on the concept of Kerry mainly in the currency markets.
Following the collapse of Bretton Woods, market practitioners started broadly pursuing currency Kerry trade strategies in the 1980s and 1990s.
Academia has followed this closely, and a host of plausible explanations have been put forth
for the effectiveness and persistence of currency Kerry as a predictor of future returns.
In a no-arbitrage finance setting, for currency Kerry to predict returns,
it must be compensation for market risk that cannot be diversified away.
Academic finance posits that the currency risk premium is a direct consequence of the covariance of returns with the stochastic discount factor.
Lustig observes that currency Kerry tends to work empirically due to the covariation of the payoff on Kerry trades with consumption growth.
Viewing currency Kerry through the lens of locally hedged option prices, Bonsali and Mencoff offer an intuitive connection between this Kerry risk premium as compensation for exposure to volatility risk.
In his seminal work, Treatise on Money, Keynes proposed that backwardation in commodities,
or the tendency of futures contracts to trade below spot contracts, is normal and related to producers of commodities seeking to hedge by locking in future prices,
thus constructing a premium that can be earned by speculators who provide the insurance of these risk premia, including current and future levels of inventories,
and shows that price measures, such as the futures basis, a measure of Kerry, contain relevant information for predicting future returns.
In fixed income markets, the nominal U.S. Treasury bond risk premium is often directly measured by the steepness of the yield curve, which is related to the term premium.
Fama and Bliss show that expected returns on bonds vary through time, and the variation of the term premium is closely related to the business cycle.
Cochrane and Piazzaeci and Campbell Sundaram and Visia relate the bond risk premium directly to the concavity in the yield curve, defined loosely as the level of intermediate interest rates relative to the average of short and longer term bond yields.
Using an empirical data set spanning 150 years, Piazzaeci, Longstaff, Schaeffer, and Strebulav show that on average, at least half of the Kerry on corporate bonds, given by credit spread corresponding to the yield difference between corporate bonds and duration matched treasury bonds, is a risk premium.
Furthermore, these authors show that actual defaults are closely related to equity returns and volatility.
While the computation of Kerry in equities is less analogous, in equity futures, the implied dividend yield, less the local risk-free rate, is one determinant of Kerry.
Fama and French document that dividend yields help to forecast equity returns, with better predictive ability at longer horizons.
Because Kerry as a concept is less popular in equity markets, our approximation used below should be taken as one attempt at making it similar to the one used for other assets, with further room for improvement.
In contrast to Kerry, where there is a naturally intuitive explanation in terms of a compensation for risk transfer, trend following, or its cross-sectional cousin momentum, has long been a conundrum of financial markets potentially delivering returns over multiple decades and even centuries according to some recent studies.
For example, Jexy, Lempier, Moskowitz.
While there are numerous behavioral explanations for returns from trend following, it is hard to find explanations that are consistent with classical finance, and thus trend following has been largely thought of as a persistent anomaly in the classical context.
Despite this lack of a convincing model to explain trend following, there is much evidence that in the portfolio construction context, Kerry and trend are mutually diversifying, especially in extreme states.
Thus, it is intuitively appealing to combine them.
Conceptually, we can think of Kerry as a position that harvests risk premiums and thus performs best when prices don't move much, whereas trend following is a long-tail option-replicating strategy, which benefits when prices move as a consequence of fat-tail events such as those experienced during the financial crisis.
Thus, combining these two strategies should intuitively result in better portfolio outcomes in a broad set of states.
We view this work as highly complementary to that of Asness, Moskowitz and Pedersen.
In that work, the authors investigate the ability of value and momentum signals to predict returns across markets and asset classes.
These authors focus on value from the perspective of book value or a measure of long-run value relative to its current market value.
Thus, their work implicitly depends on invoking some model for valuation.
We believe that in most asset classes, focusing on model-independent Kerry and time-series properties of asset prices that are basically arithmetic operations provides essentially the same gains to portfolio construction.
Further, due to the practical ease of implementation of both Kerry and trend portfolio using plain vanilla futures contracts, our work is likely to be of appeal to a wider variety of investors.
Kerry and trend, definitions, data and empirical study.
To assess the empirical relevance of Kerry and trend to futures returns, we assembled an extensive data set covering the four major asset classes, equities, bonds, currencies and commodities.
We selected five markets in each asset class that represent the major, most liquid markets available now and historically.
For equity indices, we used the S&P 500, Euro Stocks 50, Nikkei 225, FTSC 100 and S&P ASX 200.
For bond markets, we used US 10-year, German 10-year, Japan 10-year, UK 10-year and Australian 10-year government bonds.
In currencies, we used the Euro, switching to the Deutsche Mark prior to 1999, Japanese yen, British pound, Australian dollar and Swiss franc.
And lastly, in commodities, we used corn, WTI crude, gold, copper and natural gas.
To make this study relevant for actual implementation and since we are interested only in excess returns above risk-free rates,
we used primarily futures data where available, though more efficient implementation with swaps is frequently possible and should be undertaken.
To avoid biases associated with the long recent period of falling interest rates we wanted to cover, to the extent possible, also the period of rising interest rates in the 1970s and early 1980s.
In order to do so, we had to extend some data sets back before futures data was available using simple proxies from cash security markets.
Table 27.1 in the supplemental PDF provides data sources and summary statistics.
For each market, we have used actual futures data where available, the majority of each sample, and proxy futures returns prior to that.
For the S&P 500, bonds and currencies only.
Proxy futures returns are calculated from corresponding cash market data as follows.
S&P 500, we take total returns, including reinvested dividends, minus the 3-month T-bill return.
Bond futures. Using yield data, we calculate the returns of a 10-year bond financed at the short-term interest rate and including roll-down.
Currencies. We use return from spot exchange rates, plus the difference between domestic and foreign deposit rates as carry.
Consistent with the definitions above, we define, ex ante, carry in each market as the annualized excess return, assuming that spot prices remain unchanged.
This quantity is calculated daily for each market.
Market-specific definitions of carry are as follows.
Commodities. Roll yield measured between 1, the first future with an expiry greater than 1 year, and 2, the nearby future to eliminate seasonality effects.
Currencies. Roll yield between first and second future, since no seasonality concern, or prior to futures data being available, the short-term deposit rate differential.
Equities. Trailing 12-month total dividend divided by current spot index level, minus local short-term interest rate.
We do not use futures roll yield, since futures beyond 1 year to expiry are not available, and therefore there is no way to adjust for seasonality and dividend payments.
Bond futures. Calculated directly from the yield curve, not from futures prices. Defined as the yield, plus roll-down the curve, minus the short-term interest rate.
We define trend in the simplest way possible, by setting trend as positive if the futures price today is above the 1-year trailing moving average futures price, adjusted for rolls, and negative if the price is below.
More sophisticated methods of identifying trends can certainly improve the performance of trend following strategies, but the benefit of our approach is to capture the beta of such strategies without any sign of data mining.
For each market, we can categorize each day then into one of four groups.
One, positive carry and positive trend. Two, positive carry and negative trend. Three, negative carry and positive trend. Or four, negative carry and negative trend.
Finally, we can calculate average subsequent excess returns for each market in each group and annualize these. As described above, this computation is not only intuitively clean, but is similar to how these measures have been used in a model-independent way by investors for long periods.
Carry and trend in interest rate futures.
To set the stage, we will first consider U.S. 10-year Treasury Note futures. These futures started trading in June 1982, but we extend back to 1972 using proxy futures returns based on yield data.
Figure 27.1 in the supplemental PDF shows an index of excess returns of rolling futures positions beginning at 1 in August 1972.
The chart also shows the estimated carry on the right-hand axis. The carry is positive 1.4% on average, but varies significantly and indeed goes negative in various episodes in the 1970s, late 80s and 90s and in 2006.
These episodes roughly correspond to periods of inverted yield curves.
Figure 27.2 in the supplemental PDF shows a decomposition of the history of returns for the 10-year futures contract into our four groups listed above.
We find that positive carry, positive trend periods were the most common over this window, 53% of the sample, consistent with the bull market and bonds from 1982 to present.
However, 24% of the episode was positive carry but trending negative, that is interest rates rising and bonds selling off.
Of the negative carry episodes, the remaining 23% of the sample, this was split roughly equally between trending up and down.
Table 27.2 shows the average excess returns, annualized, for each group as well as for the full sample.
Over the full sample, the average excess return was 2.9% per year, but in periods when both trend and carry were in favor, that is positive, the average annualized excess return was almost double the average at 5.2% per year.
Conversely, when both trend and carry were against the position, the average return was negative 4.2%.
The mixed categories, with one of trend and carry against and one in favor, the returns were in between at 1.6% and 3.2% respectively.
We also report the returns normalized by volatility since we will compare the risk adjusted returns in each of the different quadrants across assets.
The same pattern is visible, and in fact enhanced, since not only were the positive carry, positive trend periods, the highest returning, they also had lower volatility on average.
Trend and carry across asset classes.
The rest of this paper generalizes these results to other asset classes to see if the same pattern holds.
That is, the best returns are when trend and carry are mutually reinforcing, and the worst returns are when they are opposing.
We also detail the results for different interest rate regimes and find that the results favor being in positive trend, positive carry investments, even when rates are rising.
Table 27.3 in the supplemental PDF shows the proportion that falls into each category split by sector into commodities, equities, currencies, and bonds.
Table 27.4 details the performance of each asset class within the four combinations of trend and carry highlighted above.
The results are striking and intuitive. In all but one case, BUN futures, the positive carry, positive trend buckets significantly outperform the negative trend, negative carry positions.
The BUN futures example is from a shorter sample period, July 1992 to December 2014, and the negative carry, negative trend category has less than six months of observations, far fewer than the other markets.
While we do not claim to have an exhaustive set of assets, and indeed it is possible that one can find assets where the strategy of having positive trend and positive carry is not the best performer, we expect that such occurrences are relatively rare.
In addition, looking at just the, with the trend trades, we find that positive trend trades are much more profitable when also positive carry versus negative carry.
Going sector by sector, commodities show remarkably strong decomposition results with the same pattern observed as in the U.S. 10-year BUN futures.
Some of these are worth highlighting due to the specific idiosyncratic characteristics.
It is worth noting that corn futures have data stretching back to June 1960 in which these results hold.
Natural gas shows an extreme negative return in the positive carry, negative trend category, however coming from a relatively small number of observations.
Gold has always been in contango, so has no positive carry observations.
Importantly, risk-adjusted returns maintain the same pattern across all five commodity markets.
In equity markets, the same patterns are evident, including for the S&P 500, for which we have data back to January 1960.
In some markets, the positive carry, negative trend returns are higher than the positive carry, positive trend category.
But the negative carry, negative trend returns are uniformly negative, which confirms that for portfolio construction being against the market and paying too much for this privilege is not a good strategy.
Interestingly, for equity markets, the volatilities are higher in negative trend periods, which include stock market crashes,
so that on average, risk-adjusted returns of the positive carry, positive trend strategy are the highest and are lowest in the negative carry, negative trend strategy.
Results for currencies are straightforward and cover a uniformly good sample period from the early to mid-1970s to the present.
The same pattern persists. That is, Japanese yen has seen outlier returns in the positive carry, negative trend category,
but again, this was from a small set of observations and indeed can be traced to an extremely active and interventionist central bank.
Lastly, bond futures show more mixed results, although again, in every case except bonds,
the positive trend, positive carry group outperforms the negative carry, negative trend group.
Because the majority of the sample period occurs within the 30-year declining rates regime, the average returns are naturally higher, even in the left-hand category.
The three longest histories are for the U.S., Japan and U.K. The first two markets show fairly consistent patterns.
The U.K. results are weaker, possibly due to technical demand factors in the long end of the GILTS curve.
Carry and trend across rate regimes
One important and natural question that leaps out from this analysis, however, is the extent to which these results are simply driven by the period of falling rates.
We have addressed the general performance of trend following strategies in rising rates in another chapter.
Admittedly, this statistical analysis is challenging due to the limited availability of data in the early part of the sample.
Nonetheless, we do have sufficient data for roughly half the markets to restrict the analysis only to the period of broadly rising interest rates from 1960 to December 1982.
Table 27.5, seen in the supplemental PDF, shows these results in the same format as Table 27.4.
We find the same patterns broadly hold, albeit with some slightly more dramatic results due to smaller sample sets and a generally volatile period.
All markets, except the Australian dollar, which only has data for five years on this test, show the same pattern of positive carry, positive trend, outperforming, negative carry, negative trend.
In our view, this analysis provides ample evidence in other regimes that the baseline strategy of being on the positive side of the trend and positive carry is indeed the superior strategy.
Conclusions
In this paper, we first identified that the returns to carry and trend are robust over periods and asset classes.
In particular, the combination of positive carry and positive trend positions is, without exception, better than negative carry and negative trend positions over each historical period and for, almost, every asset class and across-rate regimes.
In addition, we find that while carry in itself is a positive expected return strategy, positive trend strategies can match and even exceed positive carry strategies over a wide combination of periods and assets.
But the best combination ex ante is to build portfolios that democratically harvest the best trends and best carry.
The investment implications are straightforward. Combining positive carry and positive trend positions has high positive risk-adjusted expected returns.
As a corollary, if positive carry positions cannot be found, then by extension of our results, positive trend positions that minimize negative carry are high expected return strategies.
This has significant impact for portfolio construction at a high level.
In summary, it reminds us that the best strategy for long-term portfolio construction is, be on the right side of the trend and don't pay too much while you are at it.


# Chapter 50

Chapter 28. The Great Hypocrisy. Josh Hawes and Paul King,
Hawking Alpha, LLC. As it's told, Albert Einstein had three rules that guided his work. One,
out of clutter, finds simplicity. Two, from discord, find harmony. And three,
in the middle of difficulty, lies opportunity. For while I have become more and more frustrated
with the financial industry, and in this paper I hope to provide a few points of clarity amidst
the mess, while the street has learned how to sell simple, sadly simple in its profitable form
is not always easy. Many investors have been complaining loudly about the performance of
their funds and the huge capital gains taxes that are tacked on by the IRS. Investors from
the small retail client to the ultra high net worth investor would like more transparency in their
funds so they could find out what specific stocks that they are invested in. Most investors
are feeling like they have lost control over the decision-making process regarding their
investments at every level. I truly believe that there are better wealth-building opportunities
that an investor can adopt to protect their assets and financial well-being. In my opinion,
the financial investment community, from mutual funds to hedge funds, has become bloated and
lethargic. The majority of investors have been slowly losing their wealth for many years
in mutual funds as well as hedge funds after 2008. Fees and excessive costs are taking
a toll in their pursuit to beat the market. During the bull market of the 1990s we saw
plenty of double-digit returns, and there seemed to be a happy marriage between the
investor and mutual funds. We see now at the beginning of the 21st century, there are red
flags flying high and bright, giving a warning to investors. Mutual funds have a record of
underperformance, hidden fees, higher income tax consequences, and a lack of investor control,
and hedge funds aren't far behind. Informed investors are now beginning to realize that
they're wasting their time and wealth in many of these structured products. Don't get me wrong,
mutual funds did not start out as a bad investment. In fact, mutual funds have provided many Americans
the opportunity to amass fortunes during their working life and their retirement accounts since
the 1940s, when the Securities and Exchange Commission founded the Investment Company Act
that created the concept of putting multiple stocks and or bonds in separate funds. Since their
invention, mutual funds have been good for Americans for many decades. Mutual funds were
supposed to create an opportunity for the average middle-class American to invest like those with
more substantial resources, and those with substantial resources were supposed to be able
to use hedge funds to, well, hedge. These funds became the investor's new best friend,
offering professional management, many choices, and, for a long time, stress-free investing. It
was truly a powerful force in the marketplace. These pools of equities offered investors
diversification and more safety than most individual securities at a price that was
affordable. It was a shift from brand name investing for the generations where mom and
dad would invest in one company like General Motors and hold for life to broad-based baskets
from the academic community. This shift can really be attributed to Morningstar when in the
90s it came out with its style box. This was a feeble attempt at simplifying something academic
like the capital asset pricing model. Instantly, people could see how a fund was managed in
relation to other styles. Due to our inherent nature, it was practically a dollar printing
shop for the industry, as it provided an easily understood graphic to articulate a vocabulary
that was relatively non-existent in describing client product demand. Yet, as Eugene Fama
and Kenneth French showed, that bets on style frequently masquerade a skill and can attribute
away many managers' returns. Soon, mutual funds increased even more in popularity due to the
government-offered retirement plan. We know these plans as our 401Ks, SEPs, and IRAs.
The fact is, today, over 40% of mutual fund assets come from these retirement plans. This
sum is a major reason that vast sums of money were pumped into mutual funds. American investors
finally had an affordable investment for the middle-class family. But as the title of one
famous book said, where are all the customer yachts? Times have changed. The mask is off,
and the real face of the industry is being exposed. If you read this full paper,
you will see what I am talking about. In the early years, funds were all about making money
for clients, but now it seems that they are focused only on gathering as many assets as
they possibly can, all while under the mandate of beating a benchmark rather than making money.
Now, they are sidestepping the spirit that was born in the 1940s, and it is no different in
the hedge fund industry, where A.W. Jones was to hedge the downside of his long portfolio.
The industry is also optimizing as much market share as they can get,
even if they have to break a few laws to do it. Let's look at some statistical facts.
In 1980, there were 500 mutual funds available to choose from with a total of $100 billion
invested. As of June 2014, there are 8,300 mutual funds with a total of $26.8 trillion
invested, according to the Investment Company Institute. In 1990, the hedge fund industry
only had $40 billion in assets under management, but now there are over 8,000 hedge funds managing
more than $2.4 trillion. This is not a misprint. This monster keeps growing and growing. An
investment pattern with this concept originally developed slowly. Americans put about 20%
of their discretionary wealth into mutual funds during the 1970s and 1980s. By the
time the 1990s rolled around, investors were investing at a rate of 25%. In 1996,
that rate rose to 60%. At the end of the century, the rate of investment in the mutual
funds by Americans climbed to a staggering 82%. It's not surprising that the firms
that you see as leaders today were the early risers during the boom between 1980 and 2000.
Sadly, this increase in the number of choices available has led to the inevitable expectation
of better outcomes. As psychology has shown today, though, more in the form of choice,
equals less for us in the end. As Sheena Iyengar points out,
satisfaction comes from the perception of control, but the desire for choice is not
a choice in and of itself, even though the ability to choose well is one of our
most powerful tools. Thus, for most people, they are self-defeated before they even begin
as they are overwhelmed by all their options and with no means of process or true measurement.
Before 2003, the worst thing we could say about a mutual fund was that most of them
lost money and hedge funds were leveraged, scary instruments because of the lasting
effects from long-term capital management. From 2003 onwards, we can now say something
even worse about the group as a whole. A large number of mutual funds are now
losing money fraudulently. In 2003, New York State Attorney General Eliot Spitzer
crusaded ineffectively to put the brakes on the likes of major financial companies
for improper trading of mutual fund shares. Blue chip companies such as Bank of America,
strong capital management, and Bank One were implicated along with small trader hedge fund,
Canary Capital Partners, in schemes to milk investors of billions each year,
according to Spitzer. Spitzer exposed more than 60 years of backsliding. In 2008,
we had the largest Ponzi scheme in history exposed with regards to Bernie Madoff's company.
Of course, just a few years later, we have one of the strongest hedge fund performers
with Stephen Cohen and SAC Capital getting in trouble for insider trading. What this
does as a result is leave people worrying about choosing the right options.
An industry entrusted with nearly $8.1 trillion of the American public's money,
mutual funds used to be the investment vehicles that investors relied on to
finance the American dream of a home in the suburbs, good education for the kids,
and a comfortable retirement. Hedge funds were supposed to be tools to help wealthy
individuals protect themselves, not risk blowing up and losing their capital.
And what is rule number one for a family office? Protect the principle.
Today, we see that the nation's 93 million mutual fund investors are basically overwhelmed
by the competing claims of some 8,000-plus mutual funds. Just look at the two powerhouses
in the industry, Vanguard and Fidelity. Each of them has a different core message.
Vanguard believes in low cost and that beating the market is stupid, so being cost-focused is key.
At the same time, Fidelity is focused on its ability to distribute its stars.
These two names became masters at selling their unique selling points.
Most of the time, investors are clueless about how to enhance their wealth using mutual funds.
The average equity fund lost 12% during the year 2000, 2001, and 2002.
Since that time, the results have not been much better. In fact, if we look at the last 10 years
of the general market, which most mutual funds and even hedge funds track, we can see an eerie
indication about the weakness of their viability to grow your assets in a stable manner in relation
to purchasing power. We can see in this chart, found in the supplemental PDF, that the compound
annual growth rate has actually been negative. The fact that economists even mention the term
wealth effect should tell you something. This measure of return in relation to the
purchasing power is shockingly bad. It's not the stars nor is it the cost. It's the manager's
process that one invests in, not some little box. As Warren Buffett has said,
if in a game of poker you don't know who the Patsy is, you're the Patsy.
I give no ill face toward Fidelity or Vanguard as they did their job, make money for the
company. The responsibility lies on the investor's shoulders. It's a sad day when people spend
more time choosing their next refrigerator than their investments. For people across the
gamut, from mutual fund to hedge fund investor, I recommend a paper by Andrew Weissman called
Informationless Investing and Hedge Fund Performance Bias. It does a great job of describing the
fallacy of using the sharp ratio as a measure of goodness, especially for hedge funds. As Ronald
Reagan used to say, trust but verify. And in our opinion, you need to be verifying with
at least the right tools. But that's just about return and doesn't include the hidden killer
either. Let's get to the real problem in this industry, fees in relation to risk. It is the
expenses that kill returns. Average investors are so confused by these expenses that they have no
idea what they are paying, and high net worth investors are willing to accept unfair deals.
The sales commissions for the most active managed funds are tacked on by the brokers
and are usually around 6%. The fund deducts at least half a percentage point on average
from your account for its services. Cash drag, a reserve set aside for opportunity cost or to pay
off redemptions will add another 0.6%. Rich people with hedge funds aren't out of the woods
either. Don't forget about funds of funds. A third of hedge fund investors use these
outsourced instruments and they have their own added cost wrappers as well. A question
I constantly ask people is that it's not how much are you paying for your return,
but how much are you paying for your drawdown? The point is that investors pay billions in
costs and fees per year. What do they get in return? They almost always receive mediocre
performance and yet all the risk when you factor in taxes and many actually suffer a
financial loss. A stable bond fund, real estate, individual stock or even a treasury bill may
perform as well as the average mutual fund trading equities. Sadly, over the last few
years, this is even true for most hedge funds as well. More and more when one digs under the hood,
one just discovers closet indexers. Those just trying to match an index and not wanting to stray
too far from it in case they are wrong and their performance lags the benchmark index.
What does Jones say? Losers average losers. The churn, turnover of stocks that fund managers
perform all year long causes these transaction costs. In fact, the average turnover of the
stock is 80% or higher yearly for nearly every stock and mutual fund portfolio. By conservative
estimates, this wraps up an expense of 0.7% not including capital gains tax,
which also eats away at your profits. On top of this, add another 1.5% for management fees
and expenses, including the dreaded 12B1 that those outside the industry strongly criticize.
You better believe that those inside the industry continue to exploit it for all that they are
worth. In a hedge fund, the transaction costs are socialized due to being co-mingled vehicles.
This makes it very hard to measure costs in relation to net asset value.
Let's take an example. Assume your fund is generating a good return in today's market,
with an assumption of 12% compound annual growth rate of total assets as a long-term
buy-and-hold investor. The commissions, costs, cash drag, and fees reduce this to 8.7%. In
short, the cost of your fund manager is close to 3.3%. Therefore, the fund is underperforming
the market by at least 3.3%. After taxes, which I estimate conservatively to be around
0.7%, you will have no more than 8% of the original 12% return. This is only two-thirds
of your fund's return that you get to take home and put in your pocket, but in reality,
it is probably much less than this. Now, this type of performance isn't bad and should
be paid up for if the manager is able to manage risk and thus the drawdown is less
than the market's risk in relation to the generated return. Sadly, as history has
shown, the bottom line is that mutual funds cost way too much in relation to their return
to the risk taken and hedge funds aren't doing their mandate, hedging either.
The typical investor is averaging 3.5% in cost. What always shocks me is that most people
balk at the typical 220 structure with hedge funds and yet if we assume an average return
of 12% for the hedge fund, the total cost comes out to only 4.4%. That's less than
one point greater than the cost of a supposed fee-friendly fund. A lot of people will ask,
well, where's the value? To that I say simple. Let's take a look at the market's
MAR ratio. Remember the one from before? To the fund's MAR ratio.
As we have seen in our chart, the market's MAR ratio is around 0.1. Well, at hawking
for us, an acceptable MAR ratio is 0.5. That means that we provide a 400 times value for
only a 1% increase in cost. At least with a hedge fund, they don't get paid their 20%
unless they make the investor money. The reason that you see conflicting fee charges
for mutual funds is that there are multiple fee revenue streams and many fees that are
charged but are hidden to you. Sadly, we can look at mutual funds as a billing
iceberg. Most of an iceberg is unseen underwater. Mutual fund companies have become increasingly
adept at applying extra hidden revenue streams to their funds in addition to the standard
fees, which are also going up over time. In fact, as returns have diminished during
the post-2000 era, mutual fund companies have actually been raising fees. The average
mutual investor isn't even aware of the fees he is paying, disclosed or undisclosed.
In fact, shareholders are paying for mutual fund advertising and promotions through 12B1
fees. At least hedgies have to pay for their marketing out of their own cash flow. Unfortunately,
as mentioned earlier, most investors don't read their mutual fund prospectus where
a lot of essential fee information can be found. All 93 million mutual fund investors
reward mutual fund companies annually with about $70 billion in operating cost and most
investors don't realize they're paying it. What is investing in funds really costing
you? You can expect to pay approximately 3% to 4% of your fund assets yearly in total
cost, upfront or back-end cost for a load fund. For no load fund, you'll still be
paying around 3% to 3.5% for your portfolio mutual funds. If you do some serious checking
into these costs over the life of your portfolio, you'll see some serious money going into
the coffers of the mutual fund companies over and over again. Unlike paying your gas
bill or your electricity bill regularly, you'll hardly ever receive a bill from your
mutual fund company. Your costs are simply deducted from your portfolio returns right
off the top when the broker executes a trade. You may scream if your daughter makes an
unauthorized credit card purchase, but where are you when you pay a 5% load on a $25,000
mutual fund investment? With the boom of mutual fund returns in the 1990s, wouldn't you think
the fund companies with these huge infusions of cash coming in and internal expenses going
down would reduce fees for their shareholders? Don't count on it. The resulting discovery of
this has seen the rise of low-cost funds or ETFs and the use of research to expound
upon the virtues of passive investing. How writing it out is a sound strategy.
Since when did passive anything work in your life? You got here by your sweat and hard work.
In fact, just a little elbow grease can go a long way. The problem is that passive is
not a USP. It's a solution to fees, and the truth is it's turned into preying on the fear
of investors of missing out. As a wise manager once told me, just because exposure is there
doesn't mean you need it. In fact, due to the fixed cost of fund companies—staffing,
accounting, research, and so forth—becoming smaller—thank you, technology—fees actually
could have been reduced, much like trading costs were squeezed by low-cost brokers. Remember,
the companies increased revenues many times when AUM went in the year 2000, from $371 billion
in 1984. John Bogle says, the drive to make money for others, the funds shareholders,
may not be as powerful as the drive to make money for oneself through ownership participation
in the management company. There are two sides pulling against each other in mutual fund
companies, the shareholders, the investors and the mutual funds, and the stockholders,
the investors and the mutual fund company. For the hedge fund industry and its structure,
an important question to be asking your manager is what they are looking for in a strategic
partner, as most funds are in the form of partnership, aren't they? When dealing
with someone's money, from $100 to $1 billion, a form of partnership is entrusted and should
be viewed and protected as such. There shouldn't be a pulling of conflicting goals. There should
be an alignment of them. When everyone is aligned together, everyone is most likely to
come out ahead. This establishes the most critical element, which is trust. One way to confirm
that is by making sure that managers invest in their own funds, or at least that the
performance structure in place aligns the manager with the investor not against them.
Investors today are being fed lies and distortions and are being exploited and neglected, says
Arthur Levitt, former chairman of the SEC. In the wake of the last decades rushed to
invest by millions of households and Wall Street's obsession with short-term performance, a culture
of gamesmanship has grown amongst corporate management, financial analysts, brokers and
mutual fund managers, making it hard to tell financial fantasy from reality and salesmanship
from honest advice. A study by Dremen and Barry showed that there was a significant
gap between Wall Street analysts' estimates and actual corporate profits. What was more
striking was that they found that this gap is increasing as time and technology go on
and becomes more sophisticated. Sadly, we live in an era where a manager touts his AUM and
not his risk-adjusted return. Did you know that around 15 years ago there was not one
TV channel that covered detail market news? Today there are, according to Robert B. Jorgensen,
hundreds of radio stations that report financial news, specialized financial newspapers and magazines,
three major cable channels that are devoted to financial news, most major and minor newspapers
have business pages, thousands of newsletters that cover financial topics, hundreds of thousands of
websites that pertains to financial investments, financial salespeople to make calls, advertisers,
slick brochures and mailing pieces abound with financial offers. Literally hundreds of websites
are positioned to reveal the latest hot investment opportunity for investors at every level,
those worth thousands to those worth millions to hundreds of millions. All these triggering
devices want you to believe they're rubbing the lamp with one rub that will propel you
to untold riches with, as most look for, no hassle and no requirement to understand the investment.
But, as psychology experts have shown, the more we use experts, the higher we set our expectations
without any quality metric and the larger the potential for disappointment.
It's time for you to come to the truth about the industry and not just accept it for the
norm or you will suffer the consequences. The tax consequence, if fund managers sell stock at
a profit, you take a capital gains hit even if your fund lost money. The quick change consequences,
you invest in the fund to fulfill a certain investment strategy.
Be careful, the manager can change the strategy. The no diversification consequence,
unless you're diversified across fund sectors, you may wind up owning the same stock and
different funds. The name's the game consequence. A stock fund's name doesn't always reflect its
investing intentions. The moving manager consequence, managers come and go. If you lose your manager,
your account will probably suffer if the team isn't being built to take over the roles of
leadership at every level of management. The hedge fund consequence, the more assets a fund
takes in, the higher the chances of lower performance. The fee consequence, you'll pay
myriad fees and commissions. The bottom line is that most fund management companies fall short
in regard to performance and returns with investors' stock funds. At the same time,
they are a master at sneaking in fees and add-on charges. In short, most funds are
a marketing success, not an investing success, and ride the coattails of those that do perform
and why would those that perform care? It's their edge for outperformance.
Former SEC Chairman Arthur Levitt says, investors simply do not get what they pay for when they
buy into a mutual fund. Most investors don't even know what they're paying for.
The industry is often misled investors into buying funds on the basis of past performance.
Fees, along with the effective annual expenses, sales loads, and trading costs are hidden.
Fund directors, as a whole, exercise scant oversight over management.
The cumulative effect of this has manifested itself in the form of late trading, market timing,
insider trading, and other instances of preferential treatment that cut at the very
heart of investor trust. It would be hard not to conclude that the way funds are sold and
managed reveals a culture that thrives on hype, promotes short-term trading,
and withholds important information. Results come from having a method to the madness,
not a checklist or box. Investment satisfaction doesn't come from great performance, and
truthfully would be okay with all the fees and costs if expectations are fulfilled.
That's why I have talked about trust, because trust is the foundation of confidence,
and that should be the objective of the street, to instill confidence once again by setting the
right expectations. What does this mean to you as an investor of your hard-earned money into mutual
funds and hedge funds? You've entrusted your money and your wealth to these managers,
but you're getting the short end of the stick when it comes to them doing their number one
job of managing risk first. This is surprising, because we've always been told that the stock
market is the single best place to build wealth for your families and your retirement.
This is true if you're getting the most value for your dollar from managers that concentrate on
risk-adjusted returns. If you're not, your portfolio is on a hamster wheel going nowhere
along with the assets of millions of other dejected mutual fund and hedge fund investors.
My purpose here is to get you off of the wheel, and I hope by this point I at least
got you starting to think outside of just return and at least realizing that you can't
do what everyone else is doing and get outperformance. So how can something go so wrong?
In 2013, mutual fund assets totaled over $13 trillion. This increase can only naturally call
for companies' priorities to shift. It is evident that the mutual fund industry does not hold the
individual investor in the highest regard, and the hedge fund industry is not far behind.
John Bogle, an outspoken critic of mutual funds and the founder of Vanguard Financial,
says his biggest complaint of the mutual fund industry is that it's now run like a business
where cash flow from asset fees rather than return is the priority. Bogle traces the
industry's demise to a 1956 federal court ruling allowing mutual fund firms to become
public enterprises. This changed the playing field, according to Bogle. That opened the
door to look at this business as an entrepreneurial business in which the focus was on making money
for the stockholders, he said. Once you change the investment profession into a marketing service
business, you put management in the back seat and marketing in front. People have been waking
up to this, as the mass exodus in 2008 showed, and the lack of volume back in the markets in
the subsequent years. This doesn't mean that mutual funds and the companies that produce and
market them are going to become extinct. In fact, the opposite is true. At the time of this writing,
mutual fund companies are evolving. They're developing new alternatives and investment
strategies like low-cost ETFs and replication structures in order to hold on to their
client base and secure new clients. Eventually, though, mutual funds will take
a back seat to new forms of investing for the emerging affluent investors.
Ryan Portnoy said it best, convergence is upon us. The once distinct traditional and
alternative investment worlds are colliding rapidly. Traditional asset management firms,
fighting shrinking margins on their core business, are building new forms of investment risk that
can be packaged and sold at premium margins. Meanwhile, hedge fund shops, generally tiny in
comparison, see massive yet untouched markets that can be potentially accessed by delivering
more investor-friendly structures. Alternatives are going mainstream and fast.
Mutual funds are dying in their original state because of the unfairness of fees,
unnecessary taxes, lack of investor control, and a host of other reasons.
Don't think hedge funds are any different, though, as the industry has seen its fees
shrink from the normally 2% down to an average of 1.5%. Investors have never grasped these
points until now. Today, a lot of investors understand the drawbacks of mutual funds
because the events of the last five years have brought the message home.
They discovered that they're paying out millions of dollars in excessive cost and running needless
risk, all in the hope of outperforming the market based on return without even properly
considering risk. We need government to rise to the occasion, but no it won't,
even as the government examines more critically the operating policies of mutual funds,
things will only slowly change. Increased federal and state scrutiny will trigger more reforms that
will probably get the ball rolling in Congress, like the Mutual Funds Integrity and Fee
Transparency Act that the mutual fund industry successfully lobbied against.
Meanwhile, underperformance is the norm for mutual funds and 95% of most hedge fund managers.
In recent years, the mutual fund companies could perhaps be forgiven for the huge marketing
expenses and increased salaries of their star managers if the product delivered as advertised.
But this is no longer the case. Underperformance is the norm rather than the exception.
It's a fact. In spite of our respectable past during the 1980s and 1990s, the average
mutual fund returned 2% less than the returns of the market each and every year
while still participating fully in the downside moves. Sharp, Treanor and Jensen showed that a
sample of mutual funds from the 40s to the 60s could not outperform buy and hold, nor even a
randomly generated portfolio. It's not just the mutual fund industry though. One study found
that only 21.2% of funds of funds managers find alpha after fees, and only 5.6% of them add
value above the alpha from what they are investing in. At the very least, one should
be asking for a manager's aggregate profit and loss to see if his constituents have actually
made any money. In the mutual fund industry, we used to be in the business of long-term investing.
Now we're in the business of short-term speculation, said Bogle. Not only do the
fund managers tend to underperform the S&P 500 yearly, but the underperformance
also has grown more pronounced over the years. The individual managers responsible for funds
are now marketed as stars. The truth is that most market outperformance lies in the hedge fund
industry, and even in that niche only a few dozen like George Soros, John Paulson, David Harding,
Jerry Parker, Bruce Kovner, David Tepper and Lewis Bacon have made their clients money.
More staggering is that these few have also produced most of the return for the whole
industry. Even more surprising is that only 7% of funds that are better than the 16th percentile
manage to repeat that performance every year of their life. This means that attempting to pick
the best fund to always outperform is futile, as there's no evidence to support that it is
possible. However, finding managers for a particular objective can be done. As Brian Portnoy
points out, it revolves around trust, risk, skill and fit. Investors and potential investors are
subject to the billions of dollars of advertising promoting the virtue of funds and mutual fund
managers who are supposedly skilled in handling their money. With the new JOBS Act, don't expect
this to be any different in the future as hedge funds get into the marketing game more and more.
The chances of the fund managers beating the market are small, so small that the average mutual fund
only outperforms the market two times out of every five, according to mutual fund researchers.
If you're still not convinced, consider this. Through the end of 2001, there were 1,226
actively managed stock funds with a five-year record. Their average annualized performance
trailed the S&P index by 1.9% per year, 8.8% for the funds and 10.7% for the index.
Through the end of 2001, there were 623 active managed stock funds with a 10-year record.
Their average annualized performance trailed the S&P 500 by 1.7% per year,
11.2% for the funds and 12.9% for the index. The figures above include the sales loads
charged by many funds. Loads are akin to brokerage commissions, which come straight
out of your returns. They are charged when you buy or sell shares of your fund.
Even with these load funds excluded, the five-year average trailed the S&P 500 by 1.4% per year
and the 10-year average return trailed by 1.4% as well. These figures don't include
discarded mutual funds, which would reflect poor performance and bring these averages down
significantly. The exclusion of these mutual funds is called survivorship bias. With returns
corrected for survivorship bias, average actively managed funds trailed the market
by about 3% per year. This self-selection bias isn't just inherent in the mutual industry,
but shows up in the hedge fund world as well, as Dachev in 2009 was able to show.
The reason being is that as a fund dies off, the last few months of underperformance never
get reported and thus logged. The estimates of this effect on true return for these indexes
ranges from about 3% to 5%. Cost will drag down your performance.
Fund managers are supposed to be good, and some of them certainly are,
except we don't know which ones are good until the returns come in.
Most managers, unfortunately, will only equal the market as a whole before costs.
As famous fund manager Paul Tudor Jones said, losers average losers.
What drags performance down is the management fees, trading costs,
sales loads, and other incidentals, and thus direct and indirect costs
defeat the performance of most funds before you get your feet wet.
Mutual funds must disclose that past performance is not indicative of future results. Unfortunately,
most investors and financial media use past performance as their primary selection criteria.
I once sat in a room with a major institutional allocator who got on the phone to say,
the only thing that's indicative of the future for me is past results.
I was shocked as these guys were supposed to have some type of system for this kind of thing.
But sadly, this was what most people can only use as a means to measure
good without proper education of what good is. The truth is, most mutual funds rarely outperform
the markets for a significant period of time. Only eight funds in the history of mutual funds
have outperformed the S&P 500 for more than 10 years straight.
Next, let's take a look at taxes associated with mutual funds.
There are no tax advantages to mutual funds, only disadvantages.
If you pay taxes in all mutual funds, you have created a natural adversarial relationship.
You'll probably have to pay taxes when your stocks are sold in the portfolio.
Not only that, you may also have to pay taxes when your stock fund loses money.
Mutual fund companies during the tax year are required to distribute capital gains
and the dividends to their shareholders. Unless you own a non-taxable mutual fund,
for example, mutual bond fund, retirement account, etc., you probably are going to
have capital gains. Mutual fund companies are not looking out for you when it comes to taxes.
Shareholders pay capital gains taxes, mutual fund companies don't.
In 2013, your capital gains are taxed at the standard tax rate, 28% to 36%,
depending on your reported income, for stocks held less than one year.
If you hold funds for more than a year, it's 15% across the board.
Statistics show that American households paid $345 billion in capital gains taxes on mutual
funds in the year 2000. These gains have accumulated throughout the 1990s.
When the air came out of the technology stocks, portfolio managers began dumping them.
But even if the stocks have lost their original value, they still accumulated capital gains.
Remember, even if your stock fund loses money, you're still liable for capital gains because
during the fund's history it made money, making its capital gains embedded.
I haven't even mentioned dividends. Even if you reinvest your dividends back into the fund,
the IRS says you're still subject to tax on your dividends.
There are ways to cut your tax bill with mutual funds if the companies were responsible.
Critics charge that fund companies could lower their capital gains distributions if they wished.
One way is through improved bookkeeping. If the fund companies were programmed to sell their
highest-cost years first, once they reduced the large block of stock, it could result in tax
savings for the investors. This is called HIFO, highest in, first out, accounting, according to
Vanguard, the low-cost index fund company, because it could save investors as much as 1%
of assets each year due to lower cost. Trading this often would hinder the capital gains
explosion, but because the average mutual fund turns over its stocks once in the course of a
year, on which the commission is on average 5 cents a share every time a share is traded,
this seems unlikely. The mutual fund structure prevents tax harvesting, the timing of
securities by its manager to utilize capital losses or defer capital gains.
Regardless of when you buy into a mutual fund, you become the proud owner of the
liabilities that were incurred before you even put your money down. So you buy into a fund for
$10,000 on December 12th at $10 a share. Shortly before the year ends, your mutual fund company
calculates a yearly capital gain of $2 a share. Guess what? Because you have 1,000 shares,
you will shortly receive the distribution of $2,000, all taxable to you.
Even though you've only been in the fund for a couple weeks,
you will have to pay the same amount of taxes as the fellow that had been in it all year.
Your original $10,000 investment may still be intact, but now you have a $2,000 tax bill.
That's why you should never buy into a fund in December when mutual fund companies record the
year's performance. My full opinion is that you should never buy a mutual fund, period.
Yet a focus on taxes is really just a moot point that sidetracks one from thinking in
risk-adjusted terms. Always examine funds by their after-tax returns rather than pre-tax.
Even then you still have things like basis risk and gross exposure – don't just look at net – which
tilts analysis into the realm of the complicated. You won't find these figures in the fund
advertisement or the colorful brochures. You can find these figures in the fund's prospectus
in very small print. Thanks to the SEC's February 2003 ruling requiring mutual fund
companies to include pre-tax and post-tax information in their prospectus,
companies cannot conceal this information. The only problem is that most investors don't read
the prospectus. For example, a lot of investors who bought into a popular fund that year saw the
capital gains were spread amongst a lot of people. A bear market emerged because many
investors rushed to liquidate that particular fund and its manager had no choice but to sell
as many stocks as possible to raise enough capital for those redemptions. A huge capital
distribution was left for the remaining stockholders. There are examples of investors
who put a few thousand dollars into a fund and later were hit by Uncle Sam for a five-figure
tax bite. Was there a chance that the mutual fund managers could have foreseen the taxpayer's
dilemma and altered their selling strategy? Not a chance. Mutual fund managers are not paid to
maximize tax efficiency only to generate returns and I wouldn't want it any other way considering
how big our tax code is, which means that they need to concentrate on incentive-aligned structures.
Once you've identified those structures, then it's all about looking at how the manager
aligns himself and what Brian Portnoy distinguished as the five keys concentration, leverage,
directionality, illiquidity, and complexity. The perfection of what you are trying to look for
is whether the manager is diversified by systems too, market neutral, unlevered, highly liquid,
and simply executed. The mutual fund industry profits by keeping the spotlight off such issues
mentioned above. As long as the fund companies keep you ignorant, the negative elements of mutual
funds won't ever be brought to light. Most investors traditionally have to make do with
minimum information. That's the bare minimum ruled by the SEC. Twice a year, you get to see what's
going on in your account. Investors said they want their financial information 24-7.
Even though the internet has sped up the tracking of investments considerably,
major fund companies have been painfully slow to keep investors current.
This means that when you check your holdings on the web, your figures are out of date and
possibly flat out wrong or altogether missing because fund managers are changing your portfolio
so rapidly. This is why we utilize our own proprietary risk management software that runs
and monitors every position in every portfolio by our stringent risk controls. Each of these
is compiled in a risk report that allows us to make sure that our return drivers are not
evincing false diversification by having the same underlying risk even if we are perfectly
hedged long and short with excellent returns. This is why communication between investor and
manager is paramount. With our clients, we're able to give them access to their own portfolio
and they see their own risk all the way from a trade by trade level to portfolio level
within our own front end we call positive alpha. This allows us to engage in a conversation
that each party must have with regards to answering the question, what do you do and are you the
right fit for me? As an aside, this has little to do with return as the basis for the relationship
and that is because that is the manager's job or at least should be and since we have shown
that performance chasing doesn't work, then each party, manager and investor alike,
must be able to answer the question, what is my personal objective in the context of the risk
being taken? We must never underestimate the rich man's appeal of mutual funds.
Many older and wealthier Americans in this country own mutual funds and are comfortable
with the investment process that has been around for some 60 years. That feeling is disappearing.
Today's investors are more comfortable with change. Today, those with emerging affluence
are asking themselves if they should stay with the ultimate retail investment,
one that is associated with mass market investing and that is now viewed by many as a commodity.
Mutual fund managers don't differentiate between one investor and another.
Their job is to boost the inflow from the account and to get the numbers regardless of
who's investing in the fund. The bottom line is mutual funds do not treat their investors
like the good old days. Unless you are totally shut out from the world, you have, like most of us,
regular contact with people. Family and friends are a given. You like human contact and feel
goodwill towards people most of the time. This leads to the inevitable interaction of crowds.
The downside of human contact is when you find yourself in the overstuffed elevator and get
stuck between floors. It's uncomfortable, stressful, intimidating, and even scary.
The same can be said of mutual funds. You'll have overcrowded elevator contact,
but you still have contact with people. Dealing with other investors in your mutual fund
can invoke feelings similar to the overcrowded elevator, stress, and intimidation. The inflows
and outflows caused by human nature may be some of the more subtle difficulties of mutual funds.
Fellow investors panic when the markets fall and become greedy as the markets rise.
Instead of following the traditional words of investor wisdom, buy low and sell high,
just the opposite occurs with disastrous effects for everybody.
Every investor feels the impact of a bloated fund with too much cash. It becomes unwieldy
for good management control. This causes funds to grow too quickly, turning good-performing funds
into bad performers from one year to the next. In one important study done on long-only managers,
it was found that the trading in and out of funds by pension plans,
the pickers, would have been better off sticking with their original choice.
This is a classic example of gambler's fallacy, where we are constantly trying to find patterns
and reasons where none exist. Two books I highly recommend all people read are The Invisible
Gorilla and Fooled by Randomness. Each of these books discusses the dangers of how our mind
operates and sees things and the many errors that plague everyone from the genius to the working
man. The better question is why attempt to game a system that doesn't seem to work to begin with.
One advantage of mutual funds that's really a disadvantage is it's easy to get out of them,
remarked Peter F. Tedstrom, of Brown and Tedstrom, Inc.
This makes it simple for an investor to call in an order as soon as the market dips,
said Tedstrom. Consequently, in the end, the investor suffers poor performance returns
by frequently trading in and out of his or her portfolio. This is on top of the fact
that we've already shown managers have very high churn ratios in and of themselves.
This effect is apparent in hedge funds too, as 2008 showed, when funds of funds were pulling
their capital out of hedge funds and the result of such large client redemptions was an effect
on return as well. Even a legendary investor with one of the longest track records, Paul Tudor
Jones, had to put a restriction on withdrawals from clients so as not to adversely affect
results. This was how much the madness had crept into all aspects of the financial industry.
This very story above shows that even the world's elite, as investors in hedge funds,
are momentum investors trying to chase performance. One thing I constantly harp on about to people
is that hedge funds and mutual funds are not asset classes and people have to get that into
their head. Stocks and investing are an alternative to excess cash that one has.
This is a problem much of the world doesn't even have. The point is that investing in
liquid assets is for an alternative to cash. People will always want access to their
hard-earned greenbacks as quickly as possible when things feel the slightest bit bad.
As I tell people all the time, humans think linearly but react emotionally
and don't think that there isn't emotion tied with money. This ease, portrayed as an advantage,
is really a disadvantage due to its effect on our decision-making and must be taken into account.
As an old trader on the floor once told me, it's always easy to get in, it's never really
as easy to get out. It's time to start asking the tough questions no matter the fund, style,
or manager name. What is the market risk, the liquidity risk, operational risk? Is there any
style drift? All of these things, as well as the core we mentioned above, need to be carefully
considered. I personally am a fan of Portnoy in his book, The Investor's Paradox, where he
mentions the five Ps, portfolio, people, process, performance, and price. As he says, it's all about
method over storytelling, something this industry is fond of. What one needs to be focusing on is
finding someone with a repeatable, coherent process. There's more to proper choice than just fees and
pedigree, as Vanguard and Fidelity have shown us, as well as checking off style boxes and number of
allocations. It's time for action and to ask the tough questions of why have results for
clients been so poor? What kind of transparency should I get? What kind of fee structure aligns
me with my manager's goals? Is this the end of investment bank and brokerage domination?
I don't think so. You must understand that mutual funds are an American icon.
Since the first mutual fund was formed, it has been the building block of our country's investment
strategy and home to some 93 million Americans today. Habits die hard, even in the face of the
facts given above. My guess is that only half of the readers take any significant action.
Let's face it. Millions of Americans will continue to put their hard-earned wealth into the mutual
fund vehicle, seeking magic returns, and wealthy people will continue to chase protection in
hedge funds. They don't get the message. Did your parents ever ask you, if everyone else jumps off a
bridge, are you going to do it also? Just because most people are too lazy to do their homework
does not mean you have to be. We now have better options out there for one to accumulate future
wealth. Ultimately, an alignment of goals and skill at meeting expectations is what brings
fruitful results. With hedged solutions beginning to be offered in 401ks, people are beginning to
ask the right questions, but each person must come to their own conclusion regarding a manager's
integrity, stability, and investment process. As you go down the road of looking for the best
risk-adjusted returns, remember the old saying, you can't eat a sharp ratio. Look for those that
have the ability to robustly adapt, and not just data mine within the context of their edge.
Align yourself with the manager that is able to deliver consistent risk exposure for you,
and since one can't have return without risk, you are going to want to see a process for effectively
handling risk. You can leave a legacy, and you can break the chains of bondage that hold
a lot of investors down. It must always be remembered that growth is not a given.
We could very well be in a unique episode of human experience these past 200 years.
The world and its returns from the past are no longer here today, and the unique social and
economic drivers are not here to support them anymore. To look at return without also looking
at downside risk is a dangerous bet that I am not willing to make. Smart people are looking to
merely answer the questions of what can go wrong and what are the results if that occurs.


# Chapter 51

EPILOGUE
If a problem can be solved at all, to understand it and to know what to do about it are the
same thing. On the other hand, doing something about a problem which you do not understand
is like trying to clear away darkness by thrusting it aside with your hands. When light is brought,
the darkness vanishes at once.
ALLEN WATTS
Books are never finished. They are merely abandoned.
OSCAR WILD
The truth is, you can't rely on anyone but yourself to make your possible fortune or
prepare for a comfortable retirement. The safest, most profitable way to prepare for your future
is by following the trend, not following some talking head's opinion or your momentary
emotional whim. Everything else beyond trend is white noise. For example, think about the
next Fed meeting, as there is always a next. And you know the drill. Expect sophisticated
talk from, fill in the blank with the name of odd-looking economist that now leads the
Fed, about this or that data, economic indicators by the bushel, assorted, indecipherable mumblings
and an army of T.V. talking heads lapping it all up as if an economic god has arrived.
Let me be blunt. No politician or economist will fix anything for you. However, you can
fix your own situation or at least put much better odds on your side. You can get ahead
and ultimately leave nonsense behind, that is, Fed watching.
Look, nothing is easy. But the sooner you get off the passive investing train, the
government promises merry-go-round. The sooner you can find peace of mind and
possibly real money, imagine decades into the future to visualize interest income.
You can't. And like it or not, your social security benefits or pension, if you have one,
will be cut big time. Or you'll be working well into your 80s. Or both. Don't make
it to your 80s? Well, that's arguably the state's real plan for your golden years.
But what if I'm dead wrong? What if I'm overly pessimistic? I could be sure. Anyone
can be wrong about future market events, especially when trying to analyze a financially engineered
landscape going back to Netscape's 1995 IPO. That leaves us with a conundrum. If
we don't know what is coming next, how can we prepare for what's coming next?
That is why trend-following can't be ignored. Sometimes, in trying to make a case, I stumble
into that perfect story that makes me smile. At the end of a 2016 presentation, I blurted
out what must have sounded like an unexpected sign-off to the audience. Pray for trends.
One of my associates got a kick out of that. He needled me. And at first I felt silly
for invoking a religious ritual as a possible path to profit. Let me be clear. That's
not how trend-following works. And I did not mean to push prayer as strategy,
but concluding with that sign-off, being very clear that none of us have control over the
markets, letting go was my point bubbling up from my subconscious. Letting go, in the
form of trend-following philosophy, can be summarized. No one can predict the future.
If you can take the would-be, could-be, should-be out of life and look at what actually is,
you have a big advantage over most. What matters can be measured, so keep refining your measurements.
You don't need to know when something will happen to know it will. Prices can only
move up, down, or sideways. Losses are a life, and there is only now.
That's a more complete explanation than my call for prayer. But I know that some
become upset at those seven points. They see them as trite. Too simple. They're not
complex enough. There must be more. Covell is el Diablo. Look, even with the evidence
applied in trend-following, there will be those who cry for the secret, or alternatively
bemoan me, the messenger, not the message. After thirteen years of living this work,
confusion, critics, skeptics, and trolls abound. It's expected.
A shatter-the-earth-is-flat point of view, such as this book, will leave many incognitive
dissonance, because if trend-following makes you feel not so smart, not so wise,
then it will be hard to accept if your self-image is Ph.D. brilliant.
There are still others who will never cross the Rubicon, even if they half believe and half want
to try. Yet indecision won't work. It's the reason why behaviorists like Daniel Kahneman
are as important to trend-following understanding as the system math. It's all in, or you
definitely won't make it. But even if you have the right approach, you
better have patience, too. Altegras, an investment firm based in La Jolla, California, has placed
over one billion dollars with trend-following traders like David Harding, Ewan Kirk, and
William Eckhardt. I spent some time with the founder of Altegras, John Sunt. He put
forth a conundrum. Can a great trader have great skill and no opportunity to make money?
Can a bad trader have no skill and tons of opportunity to make money? The answer is yes
to both questions. Luck is at play in the short term for most traders. There will always
be some guy with a great one-year return, but the sustained edge appears only over time.
What happens when the bad trader with no skill finally finds no opportunity? Know that answer
or go to Vegas. And, trust me, Vegas can be super fun, so there is a consolation prize
if trend-following is not your cup of tea.
Oz Behind the Curtain Believing in price alone will never be accepted
by the masses, and the size of assets under management in passive index funds confirms
that belief. Trend-following is not a provocative enough narrative for investors raised on crystal
balls and disingenuous media selling ads for brokers. On the other hand, if you want
to avoid acute pain in your trading account when the next investment black plague rears
its head, and avoid bleeding out, and if you are ready to disconnect from a state-sponsored
feeding tube, then acceptance of price as the only fact is the starting and logical
first step. Do that, and it becomes easy.
You say, no way, trend-following is too complicated. Not true.
Listen to David Harding's incredulity as he explains his early lack of computing sophistication.
I had a very deep understanding of the ideas involved in running trend-following trading
systems, and it was very easy for me to set up. As a matter of fact, we set it all
up using spreadsheets. We didn't have any sophisticated computers. We had no computer
languages. That revelation alone might cause the folks chasing secrets a myocardial infarction.
But Harding was not done. In fact, we didn't employ any programmers at all. One of my
old friends, who has no training of any sort, wrote all the systems and everything on a
single spreadsheet, and we were able to run our firm just on a spreadsheet program in
Excel with three people. That spreadsheet continued in operations the next nine or ten
years. Laughter. I'm really letting the secrets out of the bag here. Maybe it was more than
ten years, but yes, nine or ten years. But I was able to run that very easily and didn't
indeed have to work. We were creating a track record.
He then went theoretical physicist on the deeper meaning at play within a trend-following
strategy. Trend-following is much more profound than many hedge fund strategies because it's
talking about the very exploitable effect in the price movements of whole asset classes.
People talk about anomalies. It's not like some small anomaly. It's about the way the
whole world works. It's a theory about the way the world works, which is different
from the theory that everybody in the financial world has about how the world works.
Daniel Dennett, a cognitive scientist with a zero connection to trend-following, compounds
Harding's insights. Here is something we know with well-nigh perfect certainty. Nothing
physically inexplicable plays a role in any computer program, no heretofore unimagined
force fields, no mysterious quantum shenanigans, no a long vitale. There is certainly no
wonder tissue in any computer. We know exactly how the basic tasks are accomplished in computers
and how they can be composed into more and more complex tasks. And we can explain these
constructed competences with no residual mystery. So, although the virtuosity of today's
computers continues to amaze us, the computers themselves, as machines, are as mundane as
can openers. Lots of prestidigitation, but no real magic.
No real magic? Indeed. I am under no illusions with trend-following.
There will always be critics and cheerleaders. There will always be controversy with an alternative
money-making strategy. Religious vs. atheist. Hatfields vs. McCoy's. Democrat vs. Republican.
Shoot. Plain jealousy and envy. Those drivers will always have a seat at the table, too.
Nevertheless, beyond histrionics and misinformation, I find solace in the decades even hundreds
of years of trend-following performance numbers. That is the real story. The truth
Wall Street can't accept, match, or wants buried because it casts considerable
doubt on their real agenda. Typical commission business regardless whether you make money
or lose it all. You see, no matter how many agree or disagree with this content, the philosophy
and rules, backed by positive performance numbers, especially from historic winning times like
October 2008 and Brexit 2016, it paints a picture of Homo Sapiens' money-making reality
you accept or reject. While this is the fifth edition of trend-following, it will
not be the last. Some massive, unexpected surprise will unfold, some calamitous and unforeseen
implosion where trend-following makes a fortune so massive that politicians demand it be outlawed.
And then I will need to get that trend into these pages post-haste before they lock me
up for causing too many to see the light.


# Chapter 52

These are the side margin quotations from the epilogue to receive my free interactive trend following presentation
Send a picture of your receipt to receipt at trend following comm in theory theory and practice are the same and practice
They're not yogi Berra if you want to have an impact be prepared to say the same thing for a decade
David Heinemer Hansen
Most of the Ivy League guys I know are so used to being right they get very uncomfortable dealing with uncertainty
When there is no right answer
Their egos often make them so afraid of being wrong that they're unable to make good bets
They aren't comfortable with the idea of risk because they don't know how to assess it or measure it
They have been taught to absorb knowledge not what to do with it Larry height
Our response to this environment has to be disciplined if disagreement of opinions leads to trends. We need to maintain our positions
Similarly, we must be willing to close or change positions without ambiguity if called for
Risk management is especially opportune at this time
Will Rogers summed it up succinctly even if you are on the right track, you'll get run over if you just sit there
Mark s res ups in ski
We will merely chart our course and steer our ship in the direction of the prevailing wind
When the economic weather changes we will change our course with it and will not try to forecast the future time or place at
Which the wind will change?
William Dunnegan
1954 all trends are historical none are in the present
There is no way to determine the current trend or even define what current trend might mean
We can only determine historical trends
The only way to measure and now trend one entirely in the moment of now
Would be to take two points both in the now and compute their difference
Motion velocity and trend do not exist in the now. They do not appear in snapshots
Trend does not exist in the now and the phrase the trend has no inherent meaning
Ed, cicoda
Now there's one thing that you men will be able to say when you get back home and you may thank God for it
30 years from now when you're sitting around your fireside with your grandson on your knee and he asks you
What did you do in the great World War two?
You won't have to say well, I shoveled shit in Louisiana
All right now you sons of bitches. You know how I feel
I will be proud to lead you wonderful guys into battle anytime anywhere
That's all
General George S. Patton 3rd Army speech May 31st
1944
Trends become more apparent as you step further away from the chart Ed, cicoda


# Chapter 53

Afterward.
No good decision was ever made in a swivel chair. General George S. Patton, Jr.
When I started trading in the commodity futures markets over forty years ago,
the industry didn't even have a name. Today the business has grown to the point
where there are myriad ways to describe the funds that operate and their many styles of investing.
The particular discipline of trading that I practiced,
even before the nomenclature existed, is now plainly and aptly termed trend following.
In fact, while I have seen many strategies come and go,
most of the other managers that I have known to survive and thrive over the past few decades
in global futures markets are also trend followers.
For having made my living as a trend follower, I have yet to come across a more compelling study
so clearly distilled than has been offered by Michael Covell in trend following.
I first met Michael Covell when he was working on this book.
I was a little hesitant at first about sharing some of the rather simple secrets of my trade,
and I didn't make it easy on Covell.
I started interviewing him on his investments and how he managed his risk.
He quickly made me realize that he not only understood trend following,
but that he embraced it much like me.
We delved into the roots of trend following and my investment strategies
to explore why they work rather than just accepting the results.
In reading trend following, I now see how well he was able to translate his knowledge
and the perspectives of many of my colleagues to paper.
Back in the 1970s, most of the guys I knew traded individual markets.
The ones who traded wheat did not talk to the guys who traded sugar,
and the guys who invested stocks did not care to talk to either one
because commodities were for speculators and not investors.
Further, the bond crowd thought the stock boys were cowboys.
Each group had developed its own superiority complexes
and fundamentally believed that only industry experts like them
could understand the subtle dynamics of their markets.
I guess that's part of the reason that no one cared much for trend followers like me.
I viewed every market the same way and each represented nothing more than a trade to me.
Today, for all the different facets,
I believe everyone has come to speak the same language.
It's the language of risk.
In my early days, there was only one guy I knew
who seemed to have a winning track record year after year.
This fellow's name was Jack Boyd.
Jack was also the only guy I knew who traded lots of different markets.
If you followed any one of Jack's trades,
you really never knew how you were going to do.
But if you were like me and actually counted all of his trades,
you would have made about 20% a year.
So that got me more than a little curious about the idea
of trading futures markets across the board.
Although each individual market seemed risky,
when you put them together, they tended to balance each other out
and you were left with a nice return with less volatility.
I could always see, after I got to Wall Street,
how for all the confusion,
markets were driven by people and their emotions.
That was what all these markets had in common, people.
And people just don't change.
So I set out to understand similarities in the way that markets moved.
When I added up Jack's trades,
only a few big trades made him all the money.
For each of these big winners,
I was there when experts told Jack that these markets couldn't go any higher.
But they did.
Then, when I looked at Jack's losses,
they tended to be relatively small,
although it took me many years to put it all together.
Remember, there were no books like this back then.
These seemingly small observations
became the foundation for me of two important
intertwined investment themes,
trend following and risk management.
Jack was not so much a trend follower,
but he did practice the first rule of trend following,
cut your losers and let your winners run.
Most of the guys that I knew who lost a lot of money
actually tended to be more right than wrong.
They just lost a lot on a few big losers.
I believe that people put too much of a premium on being right.
In some ways, it's one of the drawbacks for people
who went to the best schools and always got straight A's.
They are too used to always being right.
It gets back to people and emotions.
Everyone is happy to take lots of little winners
and makes them feel good.
When their trades go against them, on the other hand,
they hold on because they don't want to accept being wrong.
Many times, these trades come back
and they are able to capture their small profit.
To me, that kind of trading is a little bit like
picking up nickels in front of a steamroller.
Thankfully, the markets don't care about me or you
or where we went to school.
They don't care if you're short or tall.
I was never very good in school
and I wasn't a good athlete either.
With my background, the way I saw it,
I never had any problem with the idea that I could be wrong.
So, I have always built in an assumption of wrongness
to anything that I do.
We now kindly refer to this practice as risk management,
but I just wanted to answer the question,
what's the worst thing that could happen to me?
I never wanted to do anything that could kill me.
Knowing that I was not likely to be right that often,
I had to trade in a way that would make me a lot of money
when I was right and not lose me a lot of money
when I was wrong.
If that wasn't enough, it also had to be simple enough
for me to understand.
After many years of searching and learning things the hard way,
I evolved my own version of trend following.
The idea made sense and I had some good examples to follow.
Still, I wanted to prove to myself that it worked
without betting real money.
I had to test what would have happened
had I traded that way in the past.
These were the early days of computers,
and we even had to borrow time on university computers
to test and prove our theories.
It was a painstaking task,
but it gave me the comfort that I needed.
Now, in reading trend following,
the do-it-yourselfers might argue that having a book
that illustrates these same basic principles
takes some of the fun out of it.
Actually, Covel, like any good trend follower,
has not focused solely on the endpoint.
He gives you a deep understanding of the most important part,
the path.
Unlike so many other books that have been written about investing,
trend following goes beyond the results
to explore the journey of this outstanding group of traders.
For my staff, Covel's trend following is required reading.
For my daughters at home, it has finally settled the question
I seemed never to have been able to clearly answer myself.
Daddy, what do you do for a living?
This book captures and conveys what so many traders
have taken careers and large losses to learn,
and lucky for all of us,
you don't have to be Phi Beta Kappa to understand it.
We no longer live in that world of wheat guys,
sugar guys, and stock guys.
Trend following trading is an important force in every market
and should be a part of any diverse investment portfolio.
For me, the discipline of trend following goes beyond trading
and money management.
Trend following is a way of thinking that can be employed
in many parts of life as we all tend to continue
to do things that work for us
and stop doing those activities that don't.
The way I see it, you have two choices.
You can do what I did and work for 30-plus years
cobbling together scraps of information,
seeking to create a money-making strategy,
or you can spend a few days reading Michael Covel's book
and skip that three-decade learning curve.
Larry Hight
Larry Hight founded Mint Investments in 1983,
and by 1990, Mint Investments had become
the largest commodity trading advisor, CTA,
in the world in terms of assets under management.
The classic, Market Wizards, dedicated an entire chapter
to Hight's trading and risk management philosophy.
Note, I reached out to an associate of mine,
Steve Burns, for extra Larry Hight feedback.
Steve, who is one of the go-to voices for new traders,
reminded me of these Hight gems
left out of this edition of trend following.
Frankly, I don't see markets.
I see risks, rewards, and money.
The truth is that, while you can't quantify reward,
you can quantify risk.
If you argue with the market, you will lose.
If you diversify, control your risk,
and go with the trend, it just has to work.


# Chapter 54

These are the side margin quotations from the afterward.
The teacher retirement system of Texas made 9% in 2013, but paid out over $600 million
in fees.
Fire people, please.
Michael Covell
It is difficult to get a man to understand something when his salary depends upon his
not understanding it.
Upton Sinclair
Innocence is a kind of insanity.
Graham Greene, The Quiet American
We're all puppets, Laurie.
I'm just a puppet who can see the strings.
Alan Moore
Watchman
From a crash-only perspective, falling off the wagon and getting back on isn't the main
thing.
It's the only thing.
Ribbonfarm.com


# Chapter 55

About the Author Fear touches everyone, even the successful
people, the golden boys, the people who give the appearance of passing through life with
their hands deep in their pockets, a whistle on their lips. To take on risk, you need
to conquer fear, at least temporarily, at least occasionally. It can be done, especially
if you look outside yourself for a strong ledge to stand on.
Michael Covell searches. He digs. He goes behind the curtain to reveal a state of mind the system
doesn't want you in. Characterized as essential and required reading, Michael teaches beginners
to season pros how to generate profits with straightforward and repeatable rules. He is best
known for popularizing the counterintuitive and controversial trading strategy Trent Following.
An avowed entrepreneur, Michael is the author of five books including the international best
seller, Trent Following, and his investigative narrative, Turtle Trader. Fascinated by secretive
traders that have quietly generated spectacular returns for seven decades, those going against
the investment orthodoxy of buy and hope, he has uncovered astonishing insights about
the right way to think, develop, and execute Trent Following systems. Michael's perspectives
have garnered international acclaim and have earned him invitations with a host of organizations,
China Asset Management, GIC Private Limited, a Singapore sovereign wealth fund, BM&F Bovespa,
the Managed Funds Association, Bank of China Investment Management,
the Market Technicians Association, and multiple hedge funds and mutual funds.
He also has the distinction of having interviewed five Nobel Prize winners in economics,
including Daniel Kahneman and Harry Markowitz, and he has been featured in major media outlets,
including The Wall Street Journal, Bloomberg, CCTV, The Straits Times, and Fox Business.
Michael posts on Twitter, publishes a blog, and records his podcast weekly.
His consulting clients are cross hedge funds, sovereign wealth funds, institutional investors,
and individual traders in more than 70 countries. He splits his time between the United States and
Asia. www.trentfollowing.com


# Chapter 56

These are the side margin quotations from About the Author.
There are many who find a good alibi far more attractive than an achievement.
For an achievement does not settle anything permanently.
We still have to prove our worth anew each day.
We have to prove that we are as good today as we were yesterday.
But when we have a valid alibi for not achieving anything, we are fixed, so to speak, for life.
Take risks.
If you win, you will be happy.
If you lose, you will be wise.
Anonymous.


# Chapter 57

You know, I was trying to think of an example just as we were getting on the the call here
And I was thinking and I'm not trying to to pick on a particular bank or anything necessarily
But I a few years ago
I read something that JP Morgan had made money every day in the first quarter of the year and I was thinking wow
that's just
Is that a great example of the Gavopoli system in in action would be one question to you
The second part of that question though would be is that if there doesn't seem to be much outrage
Right now and I'm wondering if if the outrage the lack of outrage is
Reflected in the fact that so many
average everyday people via mutual funds and prep pensions actually have
Investments in these many Gavopoli type companies. It just seems like it's a precarious situation
Yeah, I don't I don't want to comment any
Particular banks and I'm not sure exactly in what section you're talking about, but it's
Everywhere you look everywhere. There's a regulation and there's a Gavopoli system at work and the outrage
As you say the outrage doesn't really occur because this as the system grows more and more people have an investment in it and
as as you stop
competition within it within a
Economy the whole economy itself becomes less competitive and we're certainly seeing that show up in our relationships with other
Countries were particularly China and other
Countries India and so forth. We're not competitive
The whole economy our economy is not competitive because we don't we don't allow ourselves to compete with one another
Anymore and so we're not competitive with with with other countries
I think to add to add to that point on the other countries. I see it being in Asia right now
It seems like that in Asia you can build an 80-story office tower
Faster than sometimes perhaps you can install a fence in America
Yeah, that's right
Yeah, trying to trying to do anything
in the United States requires enormous amount of regulatory effort and
Companies have to maintain hold staffs just just to
Comply with regulations and all of that. It's got to get paid for somewhere
So they've got to eventually get raised prices and we're not competitive
So it's and I'm not also I'm not saying this is bad or wrong or should be changed. I'm in my book
I don't say that anything wrong. I'm just looking at how does the engine work?
How does this work? And how do we explain what we've got and I'm not trying to change anything
I'm just saying well, this is how it works and I need to know how it works cuz
As your audience does and so to why we try to trade and we want to understand as best we can what's going on
So my point is not my point is not to change anything. I'm not I'm not a politician and I'm not
Running for office or anything. I'm I'm
Not promising any changes or I don't have any formula for change
I'm saying this is what's happening and you might as well take this into your personal calculus when you're when you're playing the markets
Well, you make a good you make a great point because you're talking to a guy that unfortunately grew up in the Washington DC area
So I had to listen to too much politics
And I think if I think there's there's a great video on the internet with Ray Dalio talking about the economic machine
And I think you're doing something similar, but it's your take your research and you're saying hey
Look, this is the machine that I see
This is the the economy as I see it and I'm not trying to give you a value judgment on it
But by all known facts and my research the evidence lays out. This is what's happening
Yeah, and Dalio Dalio has a wonderful video out there and he's talking about how the economy works
basically his analysis
The supposition he has we have a free economy and those kinds of things work in a free economy
But since 1913 when we had the Fed you'll see the free economy isn't really
Free to function anymore. And if you look at you look at long-term charts up till 1913 before 1913 when we had the Fed
We had a fairly stable economy. We had blips ups and downs and and and so forth, but since
Since the feds come along it's enabled
it's enabled the
Gavapali system to put an effective tax rate on citizens and spend money in excess of what they can tax
There used to be a limit to government growth and the Gavapali system
That limit was that they would have to tax people in order to fund to fund the government
But they don't have to do that anymore
They can they can go to the Fed and they can get a however the mechanism works
However, you want to explain the mechanism?
They can either you can say they can print out money or get a line of credit or whatever
Basically, they can spend money before they tax
I've shown in my model if you keep if you keep government spending to under about a percent and a half
asset effective asset tax order a percent and a half government never can grow big enough to stop the
growth of the free competition sector, but once once you once you get a
An effective tax rate above that
Then the government will grow and it will it's like it's a parasite. It's the same mathematics of
parasite where the parasite will grow and then if I will take over the host or like a cancer a
Cancer or parasite the mathematics and the dynamics are the same
It stays in balance if you keep the asset tax rate under about a percent and a half
But we're way over that now and we are seeing a decline
in
manufacturing and
tool making and you're seeing we are consuming or the the Gavapali systems now consuming the free competition sector and
when we run out of a free competition sector, which is
Imminent in my opinion then we have a whole different we have a whole different economy where you have a Gavapali system trying to manage
The free competition sector and it can't do that. It doesn't know how to do that. It's not set up to do that
It's set up to take and exploit. It's not set up to create and innovate
So we're what we're headed towards an economy in which we have
Basically control economy less freedom. I'm not suggesting this is gonna change. I'm suggesting you've got a you've got a start
Admitting that's what's happening. You got to cope with it
You have to cope with it and in your decision-making and there are ways to cope with it
Wishing it'll come back and thinking you can vote for somebody that's gonna turn around
I think is wishful thinking let me let me take a step back in I want to kind of
Take a step back for a second
Let you talk a little bit about some historical perspectives your own in particular and one of the things that I've always loved about
You and we're gonna get back on the Gavapali conversation and and kind of take it to its natural ending and and some of the solutions
That you see since if we're being faced with this Gavapali situation, you do see some clear
Solutions or at least some some directions that people can go. There's no perfection for sure
But I think what I don't think there's I don't think there's a I don't think there's a solution for the economy
I don't think there's a problem. It's just this is just what it does
I think there are some things that people can do as individuals to cope with it as it evolves and changes, but I'm certainly not
Suggesting a change in in the economy. I think this is just what it does. There's nothing to fix
This is what it does. Just like people, you know, they get born they grow they mature and then they die
That's the way it happens. And so you just have to learn to cope with things
well, you know, you just you just made my point for where I wanted to go which is and
Correcting me on language. One of the things that I've always learned from you and admired from you is the clear thinking and
And and I always when I try to respond to people if I'm doing an interview or something an online forum
I try to stay clear. I try to be as objective as I can
You are you are exceptionally good at this and especially I when people look at your writings they can see for it's very very clear
How did you start to?
Have this type of clear thinking as an individual or was this something that you felt always as a young man?
And it's been with you your whole life. How did you develop this this this way to look at the world clearly?
Well, thank you. I'm
It's a struggle for me
I'm thinking about it a lot and I always think well, I could have said that I could have said that better
I'll probably hear this interview and I say oh man, that's
That's pretty that's pretty lame. I
I do a lot of rewriting
Writing and rewriting and I've always done that and I try to think about something until it gets simple
And
If it's complicated, I don't understand it yet. So one of the things I do is I just think about things till I get simple
And then they're easy to explain and then they're pretty clear and I've had some I've had some
Mentors in my life that have been sticklers
Jay Forrester for one
Absolutely unforgiving about any misuse of English or any any anything in any equations
You ought to be annotated and the units the measure had to match and you just couldn't get away with anything
And so I've I developed that I just developed that habit
I've developed this to such an extent that uh, I mean a language that goes with it svop which subject verb object
Keep it in the present tense
That's a way that helps sort it out if I find myself straying from that grammatical
Convention I figure I don't understand something
Anything that's clear fits into that
Into that linguistic format, so i'm on this and I enjoy it. It's just a I probably take it to extreme
It's not it's it's not a good strategy socially
Um, it's so socially people are very metaphoric and they're very
Inacrid and they just say what they feel and you've got to decipher their feelings and and so forth
So I don't recommend this as a social as a social
Method as far as thinking and trying to get logical
Answers is pretty good
You know, I was wondering maybe if you would go a little bit further on jay forrester and for those that don't know
Uh very well known MIT professor
Systems dynamics and and I think jay is still with us. He's like 96. I think yeah
Yeah, and I prior publishing my book I went and visited with him and
And I included him some things on him in the book
uh amazing person he
At one point held the uh a patent on the um core memory
For computers enabling some of the first of the world in computer. He was behind that
Uh, he was inventor of the radar positioning system, which was a servo control mechanism
And then he went on and applied servo thinking a servo control thinking to business situations and developed the modeling language
Invented the whole field of system dynamics to really understand to really understand how systems work. Um, I think requires a lot of training
I think it's
Imperative to have some kind of an engineering background preferably electrical engineering preferably of servo dynamics
to understand
how systems work
So there's a whole field and it's and he pioneered it and he's just this amazing guy
Yeah, I was I was actually i'm working on a project right now and I was reading a couple of his white papers recently and it's
I I can see how he influenced you on the the clear thinking because his white papers are just
crystal clear there's it's it's just
You actually it's it's fun to read them because it's just very
There's no beating around the bush. It's all just direct. There's no and it's it's understandable, too
It's not uh an academic treatise. It's something that you can sit down and start to digest
He would go to conferences on on economics
And there would be a panel and and then they would have comments and he would point out that this
A certain speaker in his speech had contradicted himself several times
And he would he would listen he would really listen to what people say and he would think about it
And then if it wasn't accurate, he wasn't shy about about saying so
No, like I said, I I think for the audience out there not familiar checking out your trading tribe website
Edstocota.com. They could definitely get a
An understanding of if they're not familiar with what you and I are talking about right now. They will definitely
Start to understand how you handle your faqs your frequently asked questions
But that's a completely different subject
Let me let me let me on this on the uh on the topic of getting things exactly right. I want to point out
That's say coda.com not ed say coda.com. S-e-y-k-o-t-a
Dot com ed say coda goes somewhere else
Yeah, and so do I but the website is say coda.com
Ed, let me get back into the notion of govopoli for a second. So
So
We've got this system that's that's that's operating and as you kind of say it's it's doing as it should
You're observing and you're describing it
But it's not a it's not a pretty conclusion
To win the the 39th day and uh, the duckweed races across the pond. It's not a pretty conclusion
But I think what's what's tough when you look at the media and the political systems
Everybody has a fix if you vote for me, I can fix it
I've got this platform
The media says if we do this we can fix it if we watch this tv show if we get
If we get upset about this issue and i'm just as guilty as some people to get upset about things, but
It's it's all seems to be one big dog and pony show
But if we get back to your modeling of the of the govopoli system the dog and pony show just distracts us
But the system marches on
Well, the dog and pony show is part of the system
Uh, the dog and pony show is purposely
orchestrated to distract people from the real issues nobody talks about the real engine behind this is
The growth of the govopoli system and it's and the fact that it has unlimited access to money
In my model i've even tried to
Even if you eliminate borrowing for the government and you and you reduce
Regulations at this point it would take
20 or 30 years of austerity
To get any meaningful change to get us back to a free competition
society
You're not going to get you're not going to get anybody elected on a 30 year austerity program
In which they the government decides that they're not going to borrow money anymore. Now. It's just gonna happen
so
Nobody's even talking about this or nobody's even interested in it the real issues
the real issue about how the economy works and how debt works and how
Deficit spending works and bailouts and all the rest of that
uh, those are just kind of accepted and
No one
Concern is concerned about it. They're concerned about
Is there's a race riot or there's uh,
Police or uh
Someone thinks police are being too brutal or one one one race group is beaten up on another race group or there's
People coming across the border or not coming across the border
So we're we're talking about fixing things that are all symptoms
But nobody uh, there's a couple there's a couple politicians
I don't care to name any of them, but there's a couple of them that
Try to talk about the real issues. They always get marginalized
And they don't even make the final cut off that final cut in the political race
And what you have is the distinction between political parties is
Is fairly obscure at this point?
They're all voting for expansion of the govopoli system. They want to make this the system is now
Is now in its final phases where it's taking over. There's no way to resist it
There's no way to stop it. I don't recommend
Spending a lot of time worrying about it. It's like
A patient or if you had a friend that was dying of
You know terminal cancer. Well, what do you do? You try to make the best of the time you have
But you don't um spend a lot of time trying to try to fix it
There's nothing to fix or someone is just dying. There's no there's nothing to fix
We're making a transition or a butter, you know your caterpillar better a caterpillar
Or general butterfly and
Is a change in form there's nothing to fix. It's how it works
You know, you don't have to use death metaphors. There's a transformation metaphor
The economy is transforming from uh, what used to be a free competition innovative
Society it's now transforming into a very controlled society
This is a transition. It's natural. It happens
Time and time again to all societies it goes as a cycle it goes back and forth and there's a
uh
The gavapali system grows until it finally
renders that renders the host society inoperable
And then then it collapses and then there's it starts over again. This is a long-term cycle
You don't find any you don't find any currencies around that are more than a couple hundred years old
and if you had if you had invested if you had invested a penny a penny one penny at the
at the birth of christ that year zero or
Whatever year you want to make the difference between bc and ad back then that one penny growing at nominal interest rates
of a couple percent
Would be more than all the money in the world
so
Well, how can that be because there certainly was a penny and there certainly was ways to invest and how come nobody has done
that well because you
You earn a lot of money and then you get a you get these periodic resets in them in the money
So nobody's able to accumulate money for very long because the money
The money eventually goes worthless and that's also part of the design
and you
you have hard money for a while you have gold or sticks or
Some other tokens of of exchange cattle or whatever you have
and then you go off into uh
Currency and then you get
bankers decide they can loan out money because not everybody's going to come and get the money at the same time and then you
Get fractional reserve banking and then you get a federal or a uh, a central bank
And then you get excesses and you get huge bubbles like having having
um
Bubbles bubble much more frequent and much larger bubbles now
And eventually the bubbles are just gonna
Bubbles are just going to dominate and and every bubble becomes more severe than the last one
You know, and I think for some people listening I could see some in the audience
Already building up a criticism in their mind and I think what?
People need to understand is that you're not you know, some people might be thinking. Oh
Ed, ed sakote he sounds bearish or he sounds like a a doom and gloom or whereas it's a it's a very
You are taking a very distinct
Perspective to where like look i'm observing the system as it is
I'm not you're very clear about it. You're saying don't you can't really worry about it. You can't stop it
And I think and you're not trying to make a a prediction of the timing of something. You're just
objectively trying to analyze
The economy that we all are in the middle of
Yeah, i'm not i'm gonna say anything wrong with it this way it works
You just and that that's basically what we do in the trading tribe
is we look at
How can we be more effective as people in coping with the environment if you had been around a hundred years ago or maybe in
back in the
in the early 1800s
A whole different economy. You want to get out there and build machines start factories and and hire people and
and
Participate in the greatest economic miracle ever
These days it's different
It's a just it's a different and there's certainly our pockets pockets of innovation
They're very bright people coming up with a whole new industries and you get
Drones flying around that we didn't have before and lots of lots of advances. So there certainly are people innovating
But by and large a lot of people are out of work
And you have a huge dependent class and you have huge amount of moral hazard in the economic system and you have a disconnect
between
governance
And and people people don't even believe what the politicians are telling them anymore. So you've got you have a whole different
You have a whole different economy in a whole different society
And it's just part of the evolution and there aren't there you can find
All kinds of books about what we ought to do to fix things
I don't think there's anything to fix. I think it's just how it works and there's and
And there's always people that think we should fix things
It's one of the symptoms of this transition we're going through is there people want to
You know go out there in the fall and pick up the leaves and gloom back on the trees because they liked it better in
the spring when
When when the leaves were green and on the trees
But you can't you can't glue that you can't glue
The leaves back on the trees. You just have to accept the fall for the beauty that's there and and and move with it
So that's what we do in the trading tribe as we try to you know
What can we do or their own or their own attitudes and own responses?
To cope with whatever whatever the flow is not try to not try to change things pretend. They're different. What can we do?
To um to go with the flow in other words, use trend falling on our own personal lives
I know you look at trend following from not only from a trading perspective, but your own life perspective
Yeah, and I think if you're going to really be a trend follower
You're gonna have a lot of trouble
Limiting it to one area because you you know, let's say you have a trend following system
You say well, okay, i'm gonna
I'm gonna
Have a diversified portfolio
Um a trend following portfolio, so i'm gonna free myself up from emotions
Motions have always been a big problem here
So i'm gonna have a diversified trend following portfolio or i'm invest in somebody else's
A portfolio and that's going to fix this emotional problem
And then what happens? Well their their investment or their portfolio goes up and down
And then i've got emotional problems with that so
You don't you don't really fix your emotions by having a system
What you do is you just move them upstream you move them upstream instead of you have
constituents within the portfolio that used to bother you and they went up and down
And then now you have a portfolio that goes up and down you just move the problem upstream
So ultimately you have to say well
What what is it that i'm feeling and and what do I do when I feel these things and can I come up with better and more?
A useful or productive ways of responding when the thing goes up and down
Eventually, you've got to you've got to come to terms with that and so the the best trend followers I think
Are the ones that have?
Made peace with themselves and they said well his this is what I do
In the case of things going up and down the value increasing and decreasing
This is how I behave and this is how I um act and of course as you know
There are all kinds of things you can do when things go up
Some people when something goes up they still them
Some people when things go up they buy and when they keep going up some people sell more and some people buy more
And if you go to extreme in these cases, you you you you're counterproductive
Self-destructive you've got to know how to do that and you've got to do it consistently
You've got to do it in your personal life. I think if you do these things in your personal life
As well
It supports a trend following because if you're if you're not in alignment between your overall philosophy
And how you behave as a person and you try to you try to do trend following
Well is going to be conflicts. And so
We we and try and in trading try we hardly ever talk about
actual trading
Or what the markets are doing what we're doing. What we're working with is the
emotional reaction to volatility or emotional reaction to loss or
To structure or authority or all these other issues
People straighten these things out
Their relationships with their significant others and their children
Get better
They report more satisfaction all areas of life that oh incidentally their trading is getting better and they don't quite
Know how that happened, but it just they've turned into a person
That now can cope with can cope with
Uncertainty and can cope with volatility and they couldn't do it before
And you can't in my opinion you can't take a system
And use that to medicate your feelings. You've got to deal with you've got to get your feelings
uh, and
Some people say well, i'm just going to i'm just suppress my feelings of stiff upper lip approach
Or grin and bear it or flinch your teeth and hope for the best
Um, I tend to go the other way. You try to say what's the positive intention of these feelings?
Celebrate them find out the positive intention and as soon as you do that the feeling disappears and you go on to the next feeling
So i'm more of the go with the flow on the feelings as well
So there's a lot of different approaches
But by now after we've been doing this a couple decades, we're developing a body of knowledge of how to do this
and and
And to what extent can we actually reprogram response patterns? We're getting pretty good at this
As we we've been and you know, you can follow what we're doing
I I put it all in the on the blog at trading tribe
tradingtribe.com
All this is free if people want to go on there and look at it
And we were documenting we're documenting the growth of all kinds of people are using this technology and it seems to be
To the extent they use it. It seems to be working pretty well for them
It always just seems like to me that the the place that one is trying to find
It's just some some peace and contentment
And and there's this this just again. I start off with giving you the praise of the clear thinking. I think that's the
to just
Be able to sit in a room
and not feel
I mean you're not not to have this anxiety and worrying constantly and if one has that to work on that
And and I think it's just trying to find it. I I see a lot of parallels to your work and some of the meditation
I read some of the zen scholars like alan watts
It seems like there's some commonalities with some of your work in the eastern thought process
I believe every feeling has a positive intention. For instance if you're in the house
And you smell smoke
you hear crackling
sounds
And notice the temperature going up in the room and you conclude that maybe the house is on fire
That would be a really good time to feel anxiety and it takes some action in response to it
So i'm not so sure that you want to you know medicate your mind
uh anesthetize yourself
and put yourself into some um
Some meditative state where you don't respond. That's not that's not really what i'm saying. I think you want you want to you want to
Notice the feeling you're having in the moment and act appropriately
And you want to learn the difference between medicating a feeling and responding to it proactively
So it's not always i'm not suggesting you always
Aim towards peacefulness sometimes you want to get busy
You might want to get busy and put a trade on or you might want to get busy and uh, take some corrective action some risk control
Or you might want to take some action and get into some opportunity
Whatever it is. I think you can learn to come into harmony with your feelings
And to some extent it's nice to just be able to be peaceful and watch your feelings and watch your mind and and rest
It's important to rest when you're particularly when you feel tired
But I don't I don't recommend
using either
Trading tribe technology which I call ttp trading tribe process using that or anything else
For uh medicinal purposes
Like a drug or alcohol or a sedative yet watch out
There's a difference between using using any of these technologies as sedative
And I don't think any of the any of the zen masters really recommend
Blissing out and staying there permanently. I think they want to be
Responsive and proactive to whatever feeling arises in the moment. I love
The constant learning, you know, what's the better way to
to handle
Expressing oneself. What's the better way to there's always a better way to do it, right?
Well, I think so I I think I try you know, we're here in the moment and i'm learning something
learning something from you and i'm
Trying to be responsive and i'll i'll think about this later and i'll say oh man
Uh, and now I really could have said that better
But that's just that's how life is. I do the best I can in the moment and then go back and maybe
Maybe do it differently next time and try to learn
And try to learn and study my responses and say well, can I can I change the response?
And then that's what we do in a trading tribe
We try to look at what our responses are to our feelings and then we practice
Identifying well, what is it? We are doing how are we getting the result we're getting and can we change the response patterns and get different
Results next time around the only way you can learn is to extend yourself
To perhaps in front of somebody that has more experience and once you extend yourself. There's the chance that you might
You might be forced to learn something that makes you feel like wow
Why didn't I just say it that way?
I could have said it the way he just told me but
You want to get to the point of knowing the better way until you extend yourself with the wrong way
Yeah, we find in the right in the right environment in the right environment and we
Take a lot of care to set up the environment correctly
Once you set up an environment in which the goal is for people to help each other improve
I think this is true in the trading tribe and some some companies have this down pretty well too some other organizations where
When growth personal growth becomes important then
When people correct you or offer advice you say thank you. Thank you for helping me learn something
in a lot of situations somebody will correct you
or give you advice and
Then then you get upset about it and you may
You may say something to protect yourself or put them down or swear at them or tell them to
Keep their distance or whatever. So it's a different environment where
Or where where you everyone is trying to grow and do a better job
and that's another another another thing we had when you have an expansive economy and a company that's growing
and
Everybody's trying to do better
Then the culture in that company when you have growth when you have a free competition society
And free competition you have a competitive startup firm
And somebody says to somebody else there's a better way to do this
Then they say thank you for telling me and they start doing it that way when you get
a survival
Uh a survival company one that's overly, uh restrictive and political and and there's there's regulations
It's you better mind your own business and don't go talking to somebody else about what they should be doing
It's you see the whole environment a whole structure
The environment in one case is pro
personal growth and pro learning and the other one is not it's very territorial and very
Defensive you can walk into companies. You can you can sense this right away. Some are open to grow
And then they get mature and then they if they start getting
Kind of the govopoli model and they start going the other way and they don't want to have you don't you offer advice at your own risk?
You know and one of the things that you do in the govopoli book and your
Your premise is you you talk about the strategy of trend following and I don't want to phrase it as a solution
But you you you offer trend following is a way to perhaps
The better a better phrasing is is to cope with as as we move towards this
govopoli system that you see is inevitable and and trend following is is and perhaps there's other solutions and
I'd love to hear if you think there are but as you talk about trend following is one kind of a way to cope
I would love for you to go back in time a little bit if you if you will
And because you you've had an interesting career you've you've had some interesting mentors interesting students
But I know and I mentioned this in my email. There's a couple a couple traders in your early
Early years that I think had a really strong influence on you
And I I would love for you to share a little bit of wisdom or perhaps experience or thoughts or memories
About two gentlemen in particular if you wouldn't mind and that'd be Amos Hostetter and Richard Doncian and Amos Hostetter
Which was he was at commodities corporation and Richard Doncian at Hayden Stone. Just two very
Very accomplished early pioneers in the field of trend following. I was would you share some wisdom?
I'll be glad to share what I know
I
I knew Doncian a lot better than Hostetter
and Doncian had a
He had noticed this system
You notice the two-week rule in copper
Two-week rule meaning you buy something when it makes highs for two weeks and you sell it when it makes lows for two weeks
And he just noticed this
Somehow when he didn't remember exactly how you notice I asked him once how did you how'd you come up with a two-week rule?
And he said I don't exactly know and you're the first person to ever ask
He said he just kind of came up with it
As far as I can remember and that was the start of the that was the I think the first the start of
Automated trend falling was when he came up to the two-week rule and before that you can look at some of Livermore's writings
And he had other a system of pivot points and so forth and there's other um, there's other people that have talked about it
He
Basically started the two-week rule now that won't work today. It's
It's
Back back then you didn't have you have a little different character in the markets
And the two-week rule used to work in copper and then then we found it that
You had to lengthen those and maybe you make that make the weeks long or six weeks or something
I think about 30 or 40 50 weeks
Or much more than that
He was he had this system and he had a couple followers there in his office
He he came up with a system
He didn't always follow it himself
But he had this system and he had people on it and he had people that were religiously following the system and they seemed to do
Pretty well
And I came along and I studied his rule set. He had donchins rules and donchins guidelines
And about that time we had
Computers were starting to become within reach of people to use them. Although didn't have personal computers. They did have mainframes that
At some companies and I got
If you can believe this I I was I got to go into a major brokerage house at the time on the weekend
And I had access to their mainframe
Computers that they used to run the company and I was in there and there was a security guard and there was me
And I had access to the complete computer base of the whole company
I was just using it to do computer testing. Were you pension? Were you pinching yourself at that time?
No, I thought I thought it was just normal
I said I want to do this research and they said okay and nobody would in those days
Nobody ever thought about anybody trying to go in there and do anything
Nefarious. I was just in there doing research. No one even would even in those days you wouldn't even think about something like that
uh, these days you couldn't get anywhere close to the
Inner workings of a brokerage house these days you couldn't do it
But in those days I did I did the computer testing on the mainframe
Computer of the brokerage house and all of their discs and all their history and everything
They're just sitting around in this big room. It's a huge room
And all these mainframe computers and the tape drives and so forth
Now you get up you can get probably all the computational power in that whole room
Probably you got more computational power in your cell phone now
And those days that was quite the thing. So I would run I would run test back tests and I would take
I would do a back test that you could do now and
Probably a second or two
uh, it would take
half hour 45 minutes to do one set of tests
And I was using punch cards and
The was a different
It was a different era back then. Did you find it?
Did you find it unusual or was it what were your feelings at the time because it wasn't there weren't
A huge number of peers that you could bounce ideas off
I mean you said you knew dick danchian, but there wasn't this
I mean today there's there's there's a there's a much wider network and people are connected on the internet
They can reach out to you at faqs, but there was no faqs for you back then
No, and and I took danchans. I took danchan's
Work and he had a letter that he would publish
Every every week he would publish a letter
Which would have his rules on it and it would also have a kind of a model account and you could follow along
And the idea was you would follow along and you would place your orders with him. I guess that was the way that was supposed to work
So I tested his rules and I came back and said well, the rules don't they're
Internally are not consistent. The rules don't you can't program all these rules at the same time because they conflict with each other
So I started finding taking rule sets that were uh, non-conflicting
I tried to tune it up and see well, here's what we can do
And I would try different experiments with the rules and I would check it with some brokers and traders in the office
And a lot of times I say well i'm gonna i'm gonna
I'm gonna change this
I'm gonna make i'm gonna make the uh
The system less responsive. So so the market has to go up more before you start to buy it
So make the time constants longer
And people say well, that's gonna make it more risky because your stop's gonna be further away
And then we would test it and we would get the exact opposite results. All these things were very counter intuitive
I did some of the first testing and
And you're right. There wasn't any other standard now i've got i've got this on my website if you want to
If you or your listeners want to go on the website and
Replicate some of these tests to learn how to do it
I've got it on there and there's a template and you can do it on your excel spreadsheet or whatever and then
Enough people have done it. So they all get the same result to the pennies. I'm pretty confident
I've got the right answer up there, but in those days. No, there wasn't any there wasn't anybody else. I was just curious
And I said, well, how does this work?
And don chen had
Had set it up as a system. I said well
Okay, i'm gonna simulate it
I'll go back in the computer and see if I get the same results that don chen is getting and don chen is getting
and i'll try to set up a
Diversified portfolio and and we did that and we and the company I was with marketed it for a while
And we had a diversified portfolio and it was all run on computer
by a service bureau at a service bureau
and we would enter the data every day and
And then get the result and then we would put the orders in but the company couldn't stick to it the company
I was with couldn't stick to it and it also couldn't resist the temptation
Of trying to get the customers to trade more often than the system wanted to trade the system. The problem with the system was
It worked
And it made money for the clients
But the problem was it made far less money for the brokerage house
Because they were used to day traders and they were used to people coming in and lasting a few months
And then losing their money and moving on and doing something else
And so that's the way the brokerage house set up people would come in and try to trade
Lose their money and leave and here was something else. They would come in
They didn't believe they're going to stay and they said well commissions are like a tenth what they used to be
They're just they're staying with positions
And this is going to wreck this is going to wreck our business model
And so there was all kinds of pressures to get people to trade more often
And and then there was all kinds of pressures
Like you pointed out in some of your your letters to me
There was uh, well, they've got fancy names for it now a disposition effect
But in those days people just didn't want to hold on to something
It was got one up a little bit and they want to take their profit
Went down a little bit and they want to add more or and hope it'll go back up
And and so you had lots of pressures against
Uh following systems in those days
So I had invented something that no one really wanted
Uh, so then I I left and I went out on my own found found clients and I found it
Some of the most important things was developing a relationship with the clients that they really
Knew what to expect and they knew what was going on
If if the client was not
Aligned to it and if if you didn't have emotional rapport
And understand that the the the system is more than the mathematics
The system is the mathematics plus the willingness to follow the system
and when you you
You increase your worldview to include
The investor himself and his emotional responses to what's going on when you finally get this system include everything you got it
You can design a system that works
but just just going into uh
A computer and tuning up your software and saying well, here's the right. Here's the right set of parameters
Well great. You've got something theoretical will work for some theoretical robot that'll follow it
but
There aren't a whole lot of robots that got money these days
Maybe someday, but right now you've got human beings with human feelings
And unless you include that into your system design the thing is going to
You know, the wheels are going to come off the cart around the corner
Yeah, that's I mean, I think you really
Sum up so much of your ethos and those last few sentences for those that are paying attention. I'm curious
Ed too. I want just a couple more questions. I won't keep you
But as you talk about we're talking today about your research and to developing this govopoli model
You're talking about your early research with trend following models
It seems like and correct me if i'm wrong, but it seems like you've been highly motivated by the puzzle aspect
Of just figuring things out
Yeah, i'm a i'm a i guess that's I like puzzles
i've got
I've got a huge collection of uh
What what what you might call bar room puzzles is metal metal
Detanglement puzzles where you have metal pieces that fit together. You got to figure out how to get them apart together
I've got a huge collection of those and I and I
In the morning I do chest puzzles and I just like I like figuring things out
It's always been something that
Enjoy doing I don't I don't know exactly where that comes from. I think it's been um
I've been able to incorporate that in my life in such a way that it's useful
But yeah, I think that the puzzle aspect of
What I did in the markets or what I did with the govopoli book
What's driven me is I want to understand how it works. I want to know how it works
Then it works and it makes money. That's great
It's nice to make money
But I think I wouldn't have done it in the first place maybe figured out some other way of making money
But the puzzle the puzzle is what got me
I said I gotta figure I gotta
Figure this out. Why does this guy don't you just cut this thing?
That's mechanical. It's making money. How can that be? How can you get something? It's mechanical
It can make money for nothing without doing any work. How can that be?
and so
I I kind of got attracted to to looking at but I don't think it would have gone into it
I wouldn't have gone into it for just the money. It was uh, it was uh, it was the puzzle
It was uh, how does this work? I mean, how does this actually work? Can I build a model and can I understand this?
and then
When you get when you understand it, then it becomes
Interesting to explain it to people for a while or then you put it on the website or you write a book and you go on and you
You look for a new puzzle
So when you when you were back in the day though and you're in those mainframe rooms and you're by yourself
And you're and you're and you're struggling. I mean, there's there's got to be a struggle
Of course to try and figure this all out
I mean, what was your was it just pure excitement at the time?
And you're this this internal excitement that was driving you to just keep going and going till you got the puzzle solved
Well, that's a good question. That's one of the best questions ever heard
What you know what what motivates somebody who who's a researcher what motivates them to uh to go
I don't
You know, you say well, is it the pleasure of the puzzle or is it the discomfort and not knowing?
Uh, I think it's deeper than that. It's just that's what I do
That's what I do
I do that and I play banjo and and I get lost in it
That's my meditation. I have to do it
If I if I don't if I can't play music something dies
And the same with solving puzzles
That's just that's who I am and that's what I do and I don't I don't think I don't think of it
There's something that pushes me to do it
That's just who I am and that's what I have to do
Yeah, I some I mean i'm i'm I still feel like i'm uh,
In in training wheels, but I sometimes feel like my career is the same way. I don't necessarily
Know know why i'm just i'm just driven to do what I do and i'm not necessarily sure what I even do
But I just do it
Yeah, yeah, I like that and you're good at it and you
You're you're that's one of the one of the
The places I think we succeed in the tribe when we get people to this place you're at
Where you find out who you are
And what you do and you just do it and you express yourself and you create a value by expressing exactly who you are
Not pretending to be somebody else. That's a very high state
Congratulations for being there
It'd be a different world if everybody could get there and I you know
would hope people would follow in your footsteps and
And if i've watched your career many years and i've seen you
Keep expanding and getting closer to who you are. And now you're you know, you're really
Blooming and you're really making a big contribution. So, you know good job. Well, I tell you though, you know for those that don't know
you know you
I'm not gonna i'm not gonna tell the exact story but you influenced me greatly when I met you for the first time in 2001
And I I can still remember some of the things that you said to me and I think for for some people
They might have been they might have felt threatened and I don't think I felt threatened
I I probably was like
Okay
What has he just said to me? Why is he saying it? What's the deeper meaning?
So in many ways as you talk about your love of puzzles, I felt like you were giving me a puzzle
Michael you might want to consider this bah bah bah bah bah bah. And so then of course
I just considered that and and you know, you didn't give specific instructions you gave
some big picture insights
And I think that's probably how you like to be I think you just want to
You want to see if there's more puzzle finders out there
Yeah
You're you're open you wanted to do something you wanted to you wanted to go somewhere you were like on a growth path
and then you viewed uh
Ideas for me and other people and you've
surrounded yourself with
An amazing group of people who have amazing amount of ability and
knowledge and wisdom and resources you've surrounded yourself with uh,
one of the
One of the most advanced group of mentors. I think it's possible that you just like to do that
So I think you had an attraction
You attracted people like that and you enjoyed hearing what they have to say the people that are on your podcast people in your life
All are people with strong opinions
all people that make you think and make you grow and
you just have uh
you just have some kind of uh
Affinity for people like that and that's part of what makes you good at what you do
Well, if they keep talking to me, I should keep talking to them
That seems like a good rule if really smart people will agree to talk to me
I should probably talk to them because then I wouldn't be that smart
Well, it seems to be working it seems to be working well listen, hey, uh, you are
We i've kept you for too long. Hopefully, uh, you you will get on and and have some
Some conversations more regularly. I think it and I think you could appreciate I'm sure you feel this that the flow of our conversation
Because we haven't really caught up on the phone for a long time. You can feel the flow
Improve as the conversation goes on which is is fun. So yeah. Yeah
It's yeah, it takes a while
Takes a while to get into it and then
Takes well to get it to turn it off again
So yeah, it's time to time to turn it off now. So
Hey, listen ed. I appreciate you taking the time. Everybody can make it to cicoda.com. S-e-y-k-o-t-a.com. Correct?
That's right. Okay. Okay. Yeah, thank you sir
Thank you for making me think and uh and for I enjoy uh, listening to you and talking to you at all
You always make me think and I appreciate it. Well, thank you. Ed. You always make me think as well. Appreciate it. Thanks, sir


# Chapter 58

I was thinking about our call today. I'm thinking of all the assorted conferences that I've been at and I was just wondering if we cross paths
that we never met or something I
Or I don't know where you you've done these events though. You've done these things. I have we've
The one I remember seeing you at I think there's a picture of it on your website. You had Larry and Ed
Is it cicoda?
You know that's often debated cicoda cicoda. I'm not sure I think it's
How does he say I think it's cicoda cicoda you had him on stage with some?
It wasn't ukulele that he got out his banjo. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah the whipsaw song
See you you were the audience for that I was the audience for that that was probably an interesting audience
I probably would have because you know when you're on stage for one of those things you're in your own little world and you don't
Realize that that's a probably a pretty interesting audience at that moment in time
exactly
And it's um, you know that it's it's voyeurist because you guys are having so much fun and just you know
You could be in a bar the three of you and the rest of us are like voyeurs. I
Sometimes wonder is it something that comes with age where you loosen up? Or do you think guys like Larry and Ed were always that way a
Bit of both I obviously I don't know Ed at all. But Larry's always been
Thought he's always been older than me and that will never change
Probably he's always why been wiser than me
But you know and actually I haven't seen him for a while
So whether he still gets wiser or whether he all is just sort of plateaued and and that wisdom is enough to carry him through
I don't know
Yeah, I have I probably have I probably have more interviews with just me and Larry in his office on tape that I that I can't
Release not I mean, they're awesome wisdom, but there's just a lot of color there that I can't put out
Yeah, yeah, I can I can believe that Michael
Listen, it's it's a pleasure finally to get to speak with you
I have your book on my desk and and have had owned this for many many years
So thank you for everything you've you've done for the industry. Well, thank you. Thanks. Well, thanks for that word. We haven't spoken
Yeah, it's just what you know
It's it's kind of funny because it took me and I should share a really quick story with you the first time
That I met one of your old friends the head of Winton capital and I was in his office and it was in
2005 and we had just met it was just me and him and his dog he pulled he started pulling up a screen showing me
equity curves of assorted well-known
US CTAs and then superimposing his equity curve and then just giving me that wry smile of like
Did you somehow or another miss me?
That was my first kind of inkling of like the the London CTA scene
So to speak was not was not the forefront in the US
Yeah, it then there's just an exponential explosion of all of you guys. That's just out of this world
It's an interesting story. It's an interesting story. I tell you what why don't you go back in time?
I'm curious the first moment and I'm really curious your age and I kind of obviously
Some of the backstory for the audience
I mean that people can do some Google searches and stuff, but I'm curious when you first saw in your mind
And you said wow this this quantitative style this systematic style of trend following trading
Coding it and trading over diversified
Basket of markets when you knew in your heart of hearts this had changed your life or at least you knew this could make some money
Wow
Michael I think the starting place and and I'm also just conscious of the audience
Michael David and I never quite had the luxury if you call it that of
Having a role model. It wasn't as though we looked out at the investment universe and said I want to be that person
Or I want to do that thing
Certainly from Michael and I because we we go back further than our relation Michael and I go back further than our relationship with David
We were at boarding school together from age 13 and then we were at Oxford together
After Oxford Michael went to work for his father who ran a small physical commodity broking business in London
I went and took my first job at Nomura trying to sell Japanese equities to
European investors and
Michael I didn't know what an equity was when I started that job, you know clutching my physics degree we
You know, I was just fascinated by the analysis that Michael had started doing
Prompted by his father. So so Michael's father said
Here boy, you know buy one of those newfangled computers. There was you know personal computers were just beginning to
Reach the shores of the UK in the 1980s and Michael bought a Hewlett Packard
9816 his father, you know handed a book of technical trading methods and said see whether there's anything in this
So the point in answering your question, it's really been
So gradual just over time, you know, I I left Nomura join Mike this whole time series analysis
Just lent itself to you know, the physics the nerdy physicists approach
We just discovered some things we did we tested every model that we could encode from that that great book we
Distilled them down to some fundamental rule sets
We tried them on a range of markets and at that time Michael the range of markets that we had available to us
Sitting in the commodity world of London was what do we have cocoa coffee sugar?
Aluminium copper silver something like that, you know
The the financial commodities were really in their infancy. So it was only a few years later and and largely
You know once we'd met David that we started expanding the application of these models to a more diverse set of markets. So
Sorry, I I have a tendency to long-winded answers
Fine, I think the audience is by people people love that death people want to know what's going on inside the mind
Well, well, you know and that's what I'm conscious of I can't you know, there's no one there was no one moment where we said
Yes, we have created
You know the great imitator of you know, who was around in those days Richard Dennis John Henry that the mint
Gentlemen, but but Michael we didn't know that as we thought as we started think we just didn't know there was that u.s
Industry mid to late 80s. We're talking right now even early 80s
So I started working with Mike in 1984. He was working for his father. I think from early
1983 so I think the earliest a HL
track record stretches from
1983
we met David I want to say in 80s 85 or 86 and
there was a bit of a tussle David was working for saber asset management and
was this the understudy to a great chart chartist a
man named Robin Edwards who ran a fund very systematic but no computers involved and
David just immediate he was a Cambridge trained scientist and he immediately saw the
potential for using computers to encode Robin's
chart approach
So the saber folks tried to hire Mike and me out of Mike's father's business and that wasn't going to happen. So in the end
We got David to join us in Mike's father's business and then at the beginning of 1987
There was a little family tiff which resulted in in the three headstrong boys
Leaving with a hunt with one client and and setting up ahl
Now but at the moment you guys set up ahl had you
Had you made enough money at that moment in time?
You felt like I've got a little breathing room or was it still kind of we're not really sure what's gonna happen yet
We didn't have a bean not a bean in fact, you know blood is thick in the water. Michael's father
Gave him as we as we parted company and just said because Michael's dad
You know had built his business over the years and it had morphed from that commodity
Broking firm into a small asset management business based on the models that the three of us were developing
He had a very, you know in those days a parochial
Or
patricians approach to to managing money into the clients and we then there was just a
Difference of opinion. We said look you can't behave that way with your clients money
You can't take a paternal view of it. You have to be completely transparent
and we set off on our own, but
We didn't have a bean and Michael's father actually lent Michael
20,000 pounds that we spent on computer gear and rent
Until we had generated enough fees that we could go and you know rent our own office and pay his father back
So but gosh, it was a very long time before we had
Confidence in what we were doing actually, what were you?
Kind of a two-part question. What were you calling the style of trading amongst yourselves that you were
Executing what were you calling the style trading and number to talk about some of the early coding?
And how you went about the early coding
This was not the the age where you could walk out and buy a trade station or a mechanical software or something
This was hard coding in the bowels. So to speak two parts to that. What do we call it? I
don't know
Yes, it was trend following and and it wasn't long before we woke up to the fact that there was an industry here because we
Had we had friends in the brokerage community. So again
Through Michael's father's connections. There was a firm in London back in the 80s called Rudolph wolf
They were a metal broker and they had cottoned on to this idea of raising
I mean as you know Michael the roots of managed futures was you use a client would open a managed account and and give
Authorization for for the manager in our case a HL to to manage that money
so it was brokers like Rudolph wolf and and some of the early physical commodity brokers that helped us and
Educated us in what the rest of the industry was doing
So we knew we know we knew pretty quickly that this was trend following and we started to get exposure to a much broader
set of markets in
Terms of them the modeling and the development you had in Michael and me in particular real
techie wonks
Certainly, I would not get a job now as a developer. But but back in the day, that's what we love to do
You know those Hewlett-Packard 9816s
Actually, the operating system was was written in Pascal and we learned
Pascal and we've built our models in Pascal and very quickly we
Built an environment that allowed you to encode trading ideas quite, you know
Much more simply you didn't need to write them all in Pascal and compile the darn thing and blah blah blah
It was effectively an inline
simulation language which
Got developed and developed in the days of a HL once we became part of the man group and it was a well-funded exercise
We had you know code writers developers just working on that
Interpreted language, so it was a precursor to many of those like, you know, treat trade station
You know and and for a while in in the period between
AHL and aspects certainly Mike Adam had a version of that actually it wasn't his but it was
You know a similar it a similar product that he was marketing commercially
So the software development was was very much intertwined with the model development Michael
I was thinking about some of my questions for you tonight and I was thinking about the notion of achievement and
Everybody, I mean if they're pushing in some way is achieving and we're all striving
And so I think it's sometimes hard to reflect because here I am
I'm really curious about all these little things and I think from your perspective
You're just kind of saying hey, you know, we just we just started doing this and it starts working and we just keep at it
We keep our nose of the grindstone and there's some ups there's some there's some downs and next thing
You know 30 40 years later boom, boom, boom
We something interesting there and then for a lot of outsiders they look back now and they they see the they see the very successful
Firm aspect today, but they don't really think about the the progression the evolution
You know, that's a true of so much in life is that it's very hard to join dots
When the dots don't exist, you know, you you can join the dots with hindsight
So, you know, I if I was being really glib
There was a while where the three of us, you know
None of none of us got those fancy jobs and investment banking that all of our slick
Friends at university got so there was a the period where as three scientists
Just nerding around with the models and the simulations and the back data and and some of Michael's father's money and
Heavens this stuff works the more we got into it the more
The more animated and the more excited we got so there we'd have various, you know, there were little sound bites for a while
So it was revenge of the nerds for a little while
And then it was you know investment bank in a box
because in the early days of a HL again, this speaks to just
not having
Not having the sort of confidence in the models that we built up all three of us over over 30 years since then
In the early days of a HL we did a number of different things not only model development and an asset management
We did I've spoken about the software development Michael was already keen on
commercializing that piece of software
I
Meanwhile spent a fair bit of time using the software to provide consultancy services for financial businesses
And you know what came to light out of that Michael was that you know
You could fairly easily model the behavior and the profitability of
Investment banks we did a piece of work for a London
guilt trading house
We modeled, you know, how many people what are their risk limits?
What kind of investment horizon to the you know
They had the front book traders that were making a market and they had the back book traders that were holding the the house book
If you will and we modeled the behavior of those things, you know and said well roughly roughly
This looks like the profitability of your business and the and the folks
The executives that their jaws dropped they went wide-eyed because we basically modeled their business
so, you know that there was a
We went around telling everyone, you know, you can sack all of you, you know, Goldman
Salamans just get rid of all of the traders. They're very expensive and they
They have hangovers you could build it all on computers
We didn't believe I mean we believed ourselves, of course, but everyone thought we were completely nuts
by and large
You know, that's what's happened. I
Want to jump up to the mid to late 90s in a second
But I have one kind of early type question left
the notion of systematic so today an aspect
It's 100% systematic right strategies are systematized
When did you I'm guessing that there was probably a moment where?
Okay, you're doing all this homework you're in the early stages of this industry you're seeing the results
But when did you have that aha moment that like wow, we should really?
We should really take the human discretion of the the execution of this out and we should we should automate this
When was that moment? I?
Draw attention to two things. The first was
just an awareness that
Your ability to to rationalize the available information if you could do that
Pretty quickly and get rid of the noise. We'd all be much better traders
So I tell the story of in in those early ahl days
Mike and I came up with a game and it was
Just a piece of code that would randomly sample one of the markets in our database and it would
It might invert it and it might multiply it by a random factor
So you couldn't tell what the market was but it would obviously keep the integrity of of
the price series and it would present a chunk of a time series to you and then ask you to
To buy or sell and you'd buy or sell and and then it would move forward a day
And then you buy or sell and move forward a day and so on and so forth and with that kind of rapid fire
Decision-making actually we were pretty good discretionary traders
If you blow each of those ticks up into a 24-hour period with news coming at you and fear and greed and you know
The chaos of normal life you become a fairly I think a lousy trader. So that was the first inkling that
Taking the emotion out of it, you know, just reducing it to the raw information has to be a good thing
The set the second thing which I think is a theme we might return to
It turns out to be the importance of risk management because what a lot of people focus on in in any
Model development is is the models, you know, oh mark, you know, are you going long? Are you going short?
How do you feel about this market or that and that's all well and good and and you obviously need to develop
Those models and and be able to articulate what the underlying drivers are
But I think what many people miss is the risk management component where I'm going with this is that
what a lot of people do is focus on systematizing the models and then the portfolio construction or
And the risk management piece they leave to discretion
somewhere in the in the in the
Genesis of of aspect we realize that that's absolutely, you know, that's a crucial
thing to get right you need to be able to systematize not only your your models that interpret the price data and determine the
Confidence you have in that particular trend, but also you need to be able to
Systematize your portfolio construction process and your risk management process
So the the manager that says I am 95% systematic and 5% discretionary
Michael is a hundred percent discretionary that doesn't mean that's not necessarily a bad thing
I'm not saying that there aren't many geniuses out there who are discretionary, but it means
You you can't rely on the scientific process
you can't rely on the
Quality and the integrity of the simulate of the simulation and research process if you're always
resting on the if there's the hint that you're just going to step in and
You know down gear the the portfolio when the going gets tough or you're going to knock out a few markets when they
You know seem to be a little off the charts because you can't build that into your simulations
And you can't know what you're going to do in the future. So
You know over the years
Although we knew at the outset that it was a good thing to systematize over the years
I've become more more resolute in in how important it is across the entire investment process, you know
It's really interesting you talk about that notion of 95%
Systematic and some portion of discretion that was a very common
marketing line in the
Disclosure documents of trend following CTAs for a long long time and it was it was almost like this mysterious thing
Like we're 95% systematic, but there's this magical five percent discretion
Which is the reason you're giving us money and I always used to think about this doesn't make any sense
This is now I think
Probably because you and other peers associates etc have gone the opposite direction and said hey hold on
I don't think you could probably get away today
Saying in the quote trend following space were 95% systematic
I think I think people that want to invest would probably say explain that
Yeah, well, you know
It really depended who you were talking to and we all lived in fear in the early days of the of the black box
Label, so I think there was also an element of well, I think two things. I think that that five percent discretionary was
also to give
some investors a sense that
There was a there was a thought process and it wasn't just this, you know
ignorant machine
clunking away
but also I you know, I come back to the point that people built the models and then
You know, for example the overall risk target of the portfolio was something they would set discretion early on on how it felt that
weekday month or
Epoch I
Just think it was a weird point in time where we had not yet got to the point where there was an acceptance of
The of the 100% systematic so there was this this gray area in the marketing and for good and bad reasons
Perhaps as you're saying that's exactly right. And now and now it needs to be used judiciously
so
the
idea of being systematic the idea of being research driven, you know as an investor as a
you know consultant doing your due diligence you've got a scratch at that because
You know as I or give a give a bright young graduate
you know an infinite amount of data and an infinite amount of processing power and they're going to come up with the works of
Shakespeare or they're going to come up with models that just look
Staggering and you and I know Michael that you wouldn't put your money in them. So the difference between
100% systematic models that are
based on
You know curve fitting back fitting cloud patterns
data mining
Versus hundred percent systematic models that are based on, you know rigorous
hypothesis extraction
testing, you know
And a whole barrage of statistical tests to make sure that you aren't fooling yourself big big big big difference, you know
I have to give a presentation
shortly in a country in Asia a pretty successful capital in
And I and I assume they knew what I was going to talk about and they wrote me and they said hey, can you
Bring these particular charts for your presentation and tell us whether or not
These charts are in a trend or not in a trend. I guess where I'm going with that with you is the diversification
Direction because it's amazing that people still I mean those people that asked me that they want to fixate on their markets
They're excited about their markets and they don't even they're not even thinking about diversification
They don't that's not even on their horizon. They've just got their markets
They're happy about and they want me to tell them something exciting about their markets
They're going to be disappointed but talk about the idea where that that's not how you look at it
You you are saying what are the targets of opportunity when that opportunity arrives?
We are gonna we're gonna do something with it when arrives, but we can't force it and I still think today even in
2015 it's still not a widely understood concept. I
Think that's right and and I've been in exactly those situations where you know, whether it's the
the the local conference organizer who's
Asking you to tell them how great their local market is or it's the drinks party where somebody's saying what do you think about gold?
I have no opinion. I don't even I don't even know what country I'm in Michael and which way up your your stock index is
but I know it's in my portfolio and I know it's one of the
150 plus assets that we we monitor 24 hours a day
And that we we always have a position in and depending on how those trends have unfolded will have a larger
Position and depending on how those trends have unfolded will have a long position or a short position and that's the beauty of it
so over time
our style the way
Aspect has developed and and I'm hesitating just because I acknowledge that it's it's idiosyncratic
Many managers will have a different approach from ours, but but I start from the
the very high-level premise that all assets have an equal opportunity to
To manifest trends. So the whole model building process is an attempt to preserve that
To preserve that opportunity and make it as as broad and robust as possible. What do I mean by that?
What I mean is that if you?
Backfit if you build your model such that it
captures some of the characteristics of different markets, so you trade hogs
subtly differently from how you trade
Treasury bonds for example, you know, you can think you know, you can can per you can squint and
persuade yourself that you're building in some features of those markets because clearly the world of hog traders is different than the world of
Bond traders, but I put it to you Michael the dynamics of those markets are you know
That at that level of resolution there is in our opinion no persistency
all you can say about hogs and bonds is that they have a the potential to
To demonstrate trends if I had looked at say equity markets over if my data set was
Somewhat spurious, but say 2000 and us equity 2002 to 2007
I could conclude that equities don't go down or not, you know
Not for long or if I look at bonds over the you know over over the last 10 years bond script
Don't go down. Do they Michael never so you could build into your model
certain
biases or certain
scenario
Expectations and that's what we try and an issue. You know, we try and avoid those
Built-in biases. I am indifferent as to whether your
Regional equity market is in a roaring bull trend, which I know is what you want
Conference organizers or whether it's in a terrible
Terrible bear trend I will you know
I'm agnostic as to whether it's going up or it's down and and I I don't
Look at how different markets have performed historically and say my models are better at trading commodities than they are at trading
Financials and therefore I overweight the financials. I try and keep it as completely
agnostic direction Lee and and
Asset allocation wise so that it can grab hold of any opportunity that presents itself
Let me see how I can ask this so
You've traveled a lot. You've talked to a lot of different people. You've had a long career on so-called quote Wall Street
What percentage and this is clearly you can't give me an exact percentage, but I'm curious
When you're you're talking to people and you're meeting people after all these decades of going down this path
what percentage of the
educated financial audience
Do you think really grasps?
What you do at aspect?
fortunately, Michael
many more now
I think is this a hedge
And did for most of my career. I mean the irony the irony is that 2008 was
largely for
You know, I think for the for the majority of the finance
I mean, this is terrible generalizations and therefore therefore probably not true, but from my
small vantage point
2008 was the aha moment and and you know before that
Marketing what we did could sometimes be a struggle
And you know that and the and the whole you know the secular growth of our industry from being
backwood
real cognoscenti esoteric stuff and we have to say we didn't help ourselves Michael with the
Absurd fees that we used to charge back in in the 80s, you know that the evolution of that to
You know making ourselves look respectable and I want to be a hedge fund to all the way through to I think
2008 was where
As a result of that period of performance
2009 the phone started ringing and the pension funds and the pension fund consultants that
Wouldn't take our calls up until that point said
Explain again how this stuff works and then and then they were really receptive and of course
You can't make it up because then ironically, of course in the aftermath of the global financial crisis
You get a period where this stuff isn't as
You know didn't perform as well as as as it had done historically
And as well as our expectations would would lead us to believe it it does and it can and it will
so
You know to answer your question. I think that the vast majority of people now get
Get what we do, but it wasn't until
Relatively recently that that's that's been the state, you know, that's been the state of the world
Yeah, cuz you bring up an interesting point that 2008 was this watershed where people said, okay. Wow
I I put this in one of my books
the the
I don't the analyst something is an analyst but author this kind of kind of guy that talks on the shows on TV Ben Stein
He said if you made money in October of 2008 you were doing something wrong
Really?
And it strikes you funny because it's like but I know where he's coming from
I mean, I know from the vet the vantage in his his understanding of a sort of trading strategies or investment strategies
You know where he's coming from and I guess from if you only believe that
Then I guess that's a fair thing to say, but it it really it's it's an amazingly
You're really leaving some leaving some things out to say that but I just love that line though. That's great
Right, if you made money in October of 08 you were doing something wrong
I love that line. That's a that is a great one Michael and I think that you know
No, none of us in our industry should think and and I think that the the respectable ones of us
Don't think that we've ever finished, you know, it's not like you've ever you know
I've unlocked the secrets of the markets and my model is my model and now I'm off to the beach because
The aid the markets never leave you alone and be there's always some new
Some new thing that you hadn't thought about. So yeah in 2008
Well, I I think very topical at the moment is the evolution of
Portfolio construction that you know the theory and the practice of portfolio construction, you know, you'd gone
At the time a very learned gentleman the Swenson, you know the Swenson model of of
Diversification was you've got a don't just have US equities have global equities. There you go. Now, you're diversified
I'm oversimplifying it but certainly he has had and I as far as I know has no interest in
in quant strategies and at the time that was perceived to be a
very valid and very useful form of
diversification and in
2008, you know, that's why you get lines like if you lost money in or if you made money into October 2008
You were doing something wrong because the worldview was so so rigid
So I think it's it's exciting and and it keeps me young and it keeps my research team
Young and energized because there's always some new
New worldview that you should you should explore, you know, one of the things that I think is really interesting
I've had a I've had some of the brightest and most accomplished behavioral economists on my podcast
and what I really find amazing and talking to them is that
their work
Seems to be the embodiment of the traders like yourself your peers the other associates in the industry
These going down this systematic
quant trend strategy path
was really
In many ways capturing
What a Daniel Kahneman was winning the Nobel Prize for what a Vernon Smith was winning the Nobel Prize for I find it really interesting
But when I talk to them, it's amazing that there seems to be this disconnect where all these behavioral economists
Should be waking up to these quant trend strategies and saying Wow
what a wealth of
Interesting data and evidence for us to sink our teeth into but there still seems to be a wall where they've not yet
kind of like
reached pull the hood of the car up and looked under there and said hmm interesting I
Agree Michael and you know viva difference
I'm I'm I'm very how I'm very happy that that those folks and and you know and the folks at Google have not
But but you talk about behavioral economists, you know one area that has sort of fascinated me and
Is is the building of agent models? So if you can
Define players in your complex system, you know, who are the hedgers?
Who are they speculators who are they counter-trend traders all of that?
You know, you'd think you could come up with a you know
Bottom-up model for the markets, which perhaps I don't know. Is that what behavioral economists are trying to do it in in my
limited experience
Candidly don't bother it's it's a very elegant mathematical model, but it's very unlikely to be able to make you any money
I think I think the thing about what we do Michael is that it's a bit rough and ready
I don't I mean the models are very sophisticated of course and the mathematics is is complicated, but it's
You almost start from the premise that all markets will at some point display trends
and it's our job in these models to be able to
Capture those trends efficiently and not lose money in the periods where we're participating in those markets and they are not trending
There you go. I've just defined what it is
We do but you'll notice that I haven't dwelt on and it's my job to tell you why those trends exists
You know where they come from and where they're going
and so I think if you fixate too much on that which is the role of the behavioral economist you you
Very fascinating field, but it's not what we do
Yeah, I when I look at what they do. I just see okay
They seem to do a great job of really putting aside the efficient market hypothesis and in offering that hey human beings
Are not always so rational and bubbles exist and so if I just look at that very basic premise
I mean their work gets more complicated than that, but that very basic premise
It kind of dovetails right into your world in the sense that it's kind of a foundational
Explanation for why you might be successful
Yes, yeah, and I think it is and and it it makes for great reading and it you know often it there are aha
Moments as you you say yeah, well that that's why we we monkey we sophisticated monkeys behave the way we do and
You know long may it long may it continue Michael. Let me ask you
Let me ask you kind of as we kind of wind down. Let me ask one
kind of a current big-picture issue for aspects, so
I'm calling you from Southeast Asia today. The world is a is a very interconnected place
Everybody's coming online. I mean if if a country doesn't have a
Liquid futures market yet. They're surely thinking about it. They would surely like one so you we can all
How do you go about this process of bringing new?
potential opportunities new potential trading opportunities in the aspect to talk about your
I imagine you always stay excited because you're like, hey, you know
We don't even know the next grouping of markets from the next country that's gonna come online
That can possibly offer us opportunity. I think what's so great about trend following and in many ways
it is the Indiana Jones of trading in the sense that if
Once you have your models in your systems and stuff and and you know that these markets in these countries are liquid and viable
You can go in
Yeah
It's an ongoing process and it's something we devote a fair bit of time and a fair bit of money too
because you've got to keep your your heads up as
you know, Michael it it's relatively easy to get started with the
50 most liquid markets out there in the world and if you just
Ignore all of the new stuff that you're you're referring to you miss a huge
Opportunity set as a business. We we have a regular cycle of reviewing, you know
News alerts and our brokers keep us prompted of what's new what's coming?
We like to have some back data
So we're not going to be market participants on day one of an exchange opening because we've we've got to get the sort of
characteristic heartbeat of you know liquidity patterns within that market before we can
parameterize our execution algorithms
so we've got to establish a little bit of history and then we've got to establish a threshold of
viability a threshold of liquidity because
It's it's got to be worthwhile that a certain point having a one basis point allocation to a market where you you know
It isn't isn't viable in the program. So there's a there's a liquidity threshold
Yeah, I think there's something like 6,000. Is that right? 6,000 futures markets, you know globally you can very quickly
You know cut off
80% of those on liquidity basis as being viable for what we do and then it's it's an evolving cycle as the as
Liquidity picks up. We will adapt our
Allocation in the portfolio. So and the other feature of course Michael is that there may be
Constraints. So for example, we can't currently trade
the Chinese futures markets for our investors because you know, external investors are not are not allowed to participate in those markets
similarly access to Brazilian futures markets, which are
Vastly liquid, you know, there's there's a taxation
Situation that makes them extremely difficult and expensive to to trade. So all of those markets were tracking
We're collecting data. We are simulating the models on them and we're ready to go at the drop of a hat should the legislation
Change and we welcome that we love the additional diversification that it affords the portfolio
Because back to the the starting point if you just traded the same liquid 50 markets that
You know, maybe we started with in the 1980s if you if that was your your portfolio now and all other things were equal
You'd have less diversification in the portfolio because there's this a long-term a secular trend
Towards markets becoming more homogeneous over time. I believe so. We are hungry for new up new axes and new opportunities of diversification
Why do you think you're so passionate? I'm a one-trick pony
This is what I've done my career Michael I am you know by nature
I can't claim to be a scientist or a physicist
But that's what I studied and I think I got into that because I'm inquisitive and I like
Precision and I like you know, I like answers and I like
engineering solutions to things so I know I know myself that I would be a that I am a lousy discretionary trader I like
the
Application of sophisticated mathematical techniques and theories to extract signal
From noise and I love working with a bunch of really really smart
talented people all of that keeps you passionate to keep learning and to keep
Competitive and to keep doing what we're doing better and better
I mean even if the economics of this was much less
I mean, let's say it was good enough to earn a living
I get the feeling talking to you that this still would have been your pat your passion and your path. I
Absolutely
This is this is just great fun. I didn't I didn't set out on day one to be a
Great trader at all
Like as I said, I got into this working from Michael's father because I was fascinated by the application of computers to
To time series data. That's what I've done my whole career. It doesn't doesn't really matter that the rewards have been
Very good. That's that's a nice feedback loop actually that does it's a markets are a very
You know swift judge of how?
How precise and how honest you have been so it's how to keep score
It's how to keep score exactly and that that that means that I'm not in a and an amorphous world of where
People could say Wow, what a great article you've written. There's there's a scorekeeper. Yeah, Martin listen is fun chatting
Hopefully we can talk again in the future
Everybody can go to aspect capital and easily find more information on your firm. Appreciate it. Great stuff. Where are you today?
You're in America today. Yes, I am just outside of Boston. I'll be in London tomorrow and in Southeast Asia next week
I'm sure I will be hot on your heels and
You know in the aura of Michael. Oh
You're you're too kind
Hey, Mart listen, I appreciate it. Thank you very much. Nice talking to you. We'll do it again soon


# Chapter 59

So, I want you to elaborate on your physics background, but bring that into this framework
of classical economics.
Classical economics, the rationality of economic agents, the supposed rationality, the invisible
hand market efficiency, but for some reason, the idea of empirical data often gets left
out of the equation.
And I think, and I've seen this with some other traders that have had success, a physics background
is different.
It allows you to maybe look at the world through a wider lens.
Yeah, exactly.
I mean, I'm surprised that you say all of this because that's more or less what my usual
message is, and you've captured it all in a few words.
Yeah, it is true that I'm a physicist by training, and physics is a course learning
through doing experiments, and you learn that theories are no good if they're not able
to reproduce observations.
And even if your theory is beautiful, if it doesn't fit, it doesn't fit, and too bad, and
you just have to throw it in dustbin and start again.
So as a physicist approaching economics and finance back in the early 90s, that's what
struck me most is that there's a philosophical aspect to the way economics and finance theories
are built, very much axiomatic in imagining how the world could be or should be, and
then developing the theories without much care about what's going on out there.
So I guess that for a while, it was justified to do that because data was not so easy to
access.
So the whole academic world has developed without data, in a sense, and so people had
to maybe supplement the lack of data by actions and by ways of thinking that that can
happen too in physics, actually.
So perhaps I was fortunate enough to enter the field when data became very easy to access,
and when looking at data and trying to make sense of data through a kind of vivid light
on the failures and drawbacks of efficient market theory and Gaussian statistics, black
shoals, all this to me was quite apparent that it was not enough to understand the world.
But you mentioned black shoals model, it's still in use.
So even though that systematic underestimation of risk is well known by people like yourself,
it's still in use.
Yeah, I know.
I've been ranting about that for ages.
And one problem is students, you have to teach students something, and black shoal is so
easy to teach, and it's so beautiful mathematically that a lot of people just resent the idea
of having to put it all down and start again with something more messy.
Of course, the world is messy, and being messy, it's much harder to teach, to
focus on the right things, and by definition, you have to form your intuition on something
else than mathematics.
And I think that's why physics is good at that, because it gives you a lot of examples
where you can put your hand in the dirt and try to push on some button and see what
happens.
But I think the same should be more and more true with economics and finance now through
two channels.
One is the availability of data and the possibility to make experiments on data, simulations, that
is.
And even without data, you can do simulations.
You can invent wealth of people trading according to certain rules, or thumbs producing according
to certain rules, and implement whatever rule of thumb or feature of the world that you
think should be there, and then just run the simulation and see what happens.
And then what's very striking when you do that, plus it's fun, because you kind
of play God.
And second, very quickly you realize that some of the rules just don't work, they
don't represent at all what is seen out there, and others seem to capture something
that's very close to reality.
And so my impression is that by training people more and more with this type of background,
this type of experimental background, in a strange sense, because experimenting with
simulation is a strange notion, which actually even in physics it took a little time for
people to accept that simulation was a legitimate way to do science.
I don't know if you know Mark Buchanan, he's a science writer, and he wrote a few years
back something on numerical simulation which I like a lot, so if you give me one minute
I'll find the exact quotation, because I think he's spotted it right with his own
word.
Okay, so I have it.
So Mark Buchanan, in an article, op-ed I think it was in the New York Times, just after
a crisis in October 2008, said the following, done properly, computer simulation represents
a kind of telescope for the mind, multiplying human powers of analysis and insight just
as a telescope does our powers of vision.
With simulations we can discover relationships that the unaided human mind, even with the
human mind aided with the best mathematical analysis, would never grasp.
And for me, this is the essence of what the physics way of doing things has brought to
the game.
Just so people don't think that perhaps you're giving an interesting marketing story about
a physics background for your trading firm, your firm does not hire traders, am I correct?
Yeah, it only hires physicists.
And people can think that, but we've been saying the exact same thing since the mid-90s
when we started.
And I know for a fact, for two reasons, well, first of all, because the everyday life of
CSM is driven by data, is banging our heads against data and trying to make sense of what
we see and make models inspired by what we see.
And the second thing which shows that it's not pure marketing is that I think we're very
strange as a trading firm to have published something like 100 scientific papers in the
last 20 years, all published in academic journals, which shows that it's really in our DNA to
consider science as the right way to do things, if you want.
Well, let's jump right into my primary reason for reaching out to you today, which was seeing
your paper, which really didn't have any big fanfare, just kind of all of a sudden
it appeared in the internet ether, and two centuries of trend following.
And I wonder if you might lay out a scenario for how that paper came to be, and then we
can discuss some of the specifics inside it.
Okay, so as I said, we've been publishing papers for 20 years now, and this particular
paper was on the back of our mind for a long time.
There are two reasons for it to appear right now.
One may fall in what you call marketing, which is that we've been launching in January this
year a fund called Institutional Systematic Diversified, and a part of that fund is based
on long-term trend following.
So it is true that we needed to give some support to why we're doing that.
And the second thing is that we recently, in the course of the very last few years, had
access to much longer time series than we had in the past, and in Antarctica we've been
able to go back to the beginning of the 19th century on commodities and indices in terms
of data.
And so this allowed us to backtest quite a number of ideas, and in particular trend
following, and in a sense, to our surprise, we realized that the strategy has been extremely
consistent since, well, as long as we could go back in the past.
And this seemed to us to be a very interesting finding on the year where the Nobel Prize
is given to Fama and Schiller and Hansen as well, but this debate on the efficient
market hypothesis on which I've been pretty vocal myself in the last 10 years, I think
it is ironic that it's given to Fama who's still arguing that there's no bubble,
there's no crashes, that the market went down in 2008 in anticipation of the crisis and
not the other way around, and that everything is perfect.
And trend following, momentum in general, is something that efficient market theorists have
a real difficulty to explain because that's completely out of the framework.
I mean, it's very hard to evoke some kind of risk premium that would be associated with
trend following, so it has to mean that markets are not that efficient.
There's a lot of other clear discrepancies between theories and reality, but I think this
one is a very genuine and tier one which talks to everybody.
I mean, just looking at the trend on the long time scale is giving information on the future
motion of the market, then it really means that all the public information is not included
in the price right now.
So for me, it's both from an international and commercial point of view, very interesting
finding.
I thought that the statement that jumped out at me was, and this is from your paper, quote,
the existence of trends is one of the most statistically significant anomalies in financial
markets, end quote, and that's a powerful statement.
Well, you know, we've been looking at financial markets in the last 20 years, and it's very
hard to find extremely significant statistical effects.
You can find them on the high frequency side, but then there's a lot of murky things around
high frequency.
First of all, costs are tremendous if you want to trade at high frequency, so it's
not clear that all the high frequency anomalies that have a strong statistical signature are,
as economists would say, very relevant from an economics point of view.
On the other hand, these very slow trends where a lot of money can pile in and has piled
in is, of course, much more mind-boggling in a way and also has to be taken into account
both for academics but also from the point of view of professionals.
A couple of the other interesting facts that I thought in the paper, perhaps this is obvious
if data is going back to the early 1800s, but trend predates trend following, which
I thought was interesting.
I think also too, and I'll let you expand on that and expand on this, is the idea
that it's actually a very small percentage of traders employing trend following models
that make up the volume.
So the idea of trend predating trend following and that actually the traders using these
models today make up a very small percentage of the volume.
Yeah, I agree.
Well, you can see it both ways.
I would rather say that actors systematically implementing trend clearly is posterior to
the existence of trends.
But I would say that traders on aggregate using trends is probably the reason why trends
are there in the first place and people using trends have been around for 200 years.
And that's my interpretation of what we see is that there's a lot of people, of even
small people who on aggregate play the role of trend followers and therefore create these
trends.
You know, it's interesting also, you mentioned Fama and the split Nobel Prize.
I had a chance to speak with Harry Markowitz recently who's very lucid and the point
that I made with Harry was, you know, Harry, did you find it interesting that when you
wrote back in the 1950s, this is what we should be doing that within a few decades, other academics
had taken what you said we should be doing and had said this is what we are doing.
And his response was, well, I think you're gonna have to talk to the behavioral economist
about that.
He didn't want to touch it.
But his point being is that, you know, I never said this is what it is.
This is what we should be doing and other people interpreted it to come up with these,
as you might say, these hard axioms that became rules, the foundation of the efficient
market hypothesis.
Yeah, it is a strange field in the sense that there's clearly interaction between what
people do and what people observe.
And the use of Black Scholes in 1987 is not a vivid example of how things can go
wrong when wrong models are used.
That's what makes the subject fascinating also for physicists because you have to go
kind of one step further and try to understand how the models themselves might change the
game.
So actually, we came up with a simple model on how, you know, trend could lead to trend
or mean reversion could lead to mean reversion.
And a priori both are equally, I mean, you know, it's not clear that we could imagine
a world where people would follow mean reversion rather than trends.
But it seems that humans have such a propensity to follow trends.
There's a lot of very interesting psychological experiments where you can show that, you
know, when a small child sees three points aligning on a line, it gives him pleasure.
So clearly, we're wide in to extrapolate past trends.
And that's probably a way to, you know, extrapolate the motion of a tiger jumping
on us or something that makes us alive today.
So my intuition is that it's much harder to go against the trend than it is to follow
the trend.
And again, there's a lot of very interesting psychological or even biological experiments
showing that there's a lot of things, hormones going in and out, our body in the two situations,
one when we're conforming to the crowd and the other when we're not conforming
to the crowd, there's a pain associated not conforming to what's going on.
Classical economics has no framework through which to understand wild markets.
And wild is your phrasing.
And I wonder if you could talk to the idea of classical economics not having the ability
to have a framework to see those wild markets, to see through them.
But how do you, how do you, when you use the word wild, what does that mean to you?
Yeah, okay.
So you're referring to a paper that I wrote in 2008 in Nature, which was just after the
unraveling of the crisis.
And this made me react very strongly because I felt that this was, you know, in the cards.
And of course, other people had seen it coming.
But I was not too happy with the way economists have been kind of dismissing all the attempts
to introduce a little more wildness in the description of economic systems and financial
markets.
So actually wild is a reference to Mandelbrot.
Mandelbrot has introduced fractals.
Of course, he's introduced also the idea of distributions without the second moment,
without variance or infinite variance or distribution with infinite means.
And that's his classification of randomness, if you want.
So he would call benign randomness the one that economists love, cautions and things
where the average, where you can replace a heterogeneous system with its average.
And we know, for example, as this relates to the book of Piketty as well, that the
distribution of anything in economics is so broadly distributed that very often it just
doesn't make sense at all to replace a collection of people by an average people, by a representative
agent would be the classical word.
But coming back to Mandelbrot, benign randomness is the one that I just described, whereas wild
randomness is the one that is difficult to tame.
And it's difficult to tame because it's hard to speak about averages and variances.
And so that's really what I was referring to when using the word wild.
Now why is economics in general not able to capture these big swings?
It's very strange.
It's because the models are constructed to be intrinsically stable.
It's like people insist on the fact that a rational world is a stable world.
And so your model should be stable.
And so economics models come up with equilibrium points which are intrinsically stable.
That is, if you perturb them by small amounts, they're going to naturally go back to equilibrium.
And this is so much ingrained in the model that it's, by definition, impossible to
have a crisis.
And what's interesting is that when you remove a few of these rational assumptions
and introduce market imperfections, then it's very easy to find situations where the rational
equilibrium of economists, even if it still exists, is actually unstable.
And it's put out by small external shocks in such a way that the system goes out of
whack for a while, and this is what we would call a crisis.
So I think that the mathematical apparatus is there to allow us to not only describe,
but anticipate to some extent, or at least make a space for crisis in the economic world.
And to me, this is a fascinating topic of research on which we've been focusing in
the last few years.
You know, I'll leave you with this, but I think the fun thing talking to you is
you sound like you're having fun with this subject.
You have fun with what you do, you get to wake up every day and have fun.
Yeah, exactly.
That's totally true, and I'm happy you say that.
There's not much more to say, but I can feel it, because it's a big, it's an experiment
to try and find empirical data, to try and solve the puzzle to the best that you can,
given that there's always going to be uncertainty.
And I think what I have loved over the years talking to you today, many of your peers,
is just that when one accepts uncertainty, there's a certain honesty to it.
And I think it's a lot of discomfort for me when people are so certain about what's going
to happen.
And so I personally enjoy it.
But you know, I think that that's the big difference between physicists and economists,
and I think there's a lot to be written about this.
And in a sense, I would say that we're privileged as physicists because we don't have to talk
to politicians, and we don't have to make statements about how the world is supposed
to work, in the sense that nobody's relying on us to make political decisions.
And I think there's a huge amount of pressure on economists, because they are under the
spotlight.
They have to come up with stories and decisions.
And this means that it's very hard for them to take a step back and say, OK, I'm really
going to try to understand what's going on here.
And maybe it's going to take me 10 years or 20 years, but at the end of the day, we'll
have a better theory for the world.
And I've been said that by many people who said, OK, well, all this is great, but what
am I going to say to my mystery of finance when he asks me about, should I raise tax
or should I do this or that?
And it's true that it puts people in a bad situation because they can't take long term.
And as you've just said, as physicists by training, I think what we love is to be able
to think that we understand something.
And if we fail, well, it's OK.
There's nothing wrong in failing.
We know that physics has had so many revolutions and so many things that people were actually
convinced were true, found out to be wrong in the end.
So it's an incredibly good back sign against what you said earlier, against certainty and
a sudden form of arrogance as well.
I guess to some degree, you're expecting failure.
And maybe some of the economists don't want to, they can't acknowledge that there might
be failure.
Yeah.
Yeah, because the field is constructed completely differently for sociological reasons as well.
Hey, Jean, I appreciate you taking the time today.
This was great.
And I hope you enjoyed it.
And I think the audience will enjoy listening to your insights and hopefully we can chat
again in the future as the wild.
Very happy to meet you someday.
Of course, we've liked your book, as you saw, it's actually referenced in our paper.
And I'm very happy to have been able to talk to you today.
Yeah, it was fun.
It was fun.
I appreciate it.
It was good chatting.
To find out more information, you can check out the Capital Fund Management website.
Also to see the trend following white paper we discussed, two centuries of trend following.
Google will bring it right up.


# Chapter 60

And if you'll indulge me for a moment, I would love to go back in time a little bit.
And I'd love you to paint the picture because we're going to break apart your trading strategy,
your management strategy.
I want to break all that apart.
But before that, a guy with a PhD in mathematical physics going to Goldman Sachs, you weren't
the guy that was living and breathing trading when you got there, were you?
Not at all, no.
When I turned up my first interview at Goldman Sachs in 1992, I didn't actually know who
Goldman Sachs were.
I thought that they were a bank, but apart from that, I wasn't entirely sure.
So no, I didn't live or breathe trading.
I didn't even live or breathe quantitative finance.
Probably couldn't have discounted the cash flow.
So they were looking for a certain type of thinker, a certain type of thinking.
Yes, they were looking for somebody that's some sort of mathematical background.
Computer programming is also important.
I say this to just about everybody that we interview, that it's sort of useless being
a mathematician, being a statistician, without being able to computer program, or without
being able to program a computer rather, because it's like being a novelist who can't
write.
The way that you express your views or express your ideas is through programming computers.
And so I was a reasonably good computer programmer.
I had a background in quant, and Goldman very kindly took a punt on me.
I saw that your co-founder, Eric, he called programming, he said, it's today's literacy.
You have to have it.
It's today's literacy, and that strand runs through a lot of my career, but also runs
through what we do at Cantab, everybody programs.
I, myself, just spent the last two or three weeks programming up a piece of our infrastructure.
But as I lay that foundation as you talk about your background, it's going to look to the
audience out there that there's this kind of this perfect physics mathematical background.
But you're also a guy that you go to work at Goldman Sachs, and I've seen this mentioned
in the press.
You allowed yourself to turn up at a black tie dinner wearing a kilt.
But I'm curious, though, you I mean, you're not a cavalier guy, obviously, you're very
grounded, you're very, you know, you think in terms of risk.
But what was your thinking there?
What what is your thought process that you allow yourself to to stand out like that?
Truth is, of course, that for somebody who, like myself, originally came from Scotland,
the traditional black tie dress is a is a kilt and all of the attendance bits and
pieces with that.
So it's not it's not like I turned up in a clown costume.
I hope you did not infer that's what I was saying.
No, no, no, I'm smiling as I'm saying this.
But I do think that one thing that Goldman Sachs was very good at doing, and presumably
still is, is it's tolerant to some degree of idiosyncrasy.
Certainly in the early days, Goldman was a partnership with maybe 150 partners running
their small businesses that made it very much a meritocracy, very much a what have you
done for me today kind of thing.
Me turning up in a kilt is not the strangest thing that I've seen.
But it is it's a place where really much more so than other banks, certainly in the
90s. It is a place where all Goldman was interested in was was you were you could
do your job in certain limits, obviously, turning up at a client court when in a
client costume at a client meeting would probably be a very quick way of getting
far.
I mean, I took it as a complete outsider reading about it in a press account, I
just took it as you saying, you know, look, I'm not gonna I'm gonna march to
some, some music that is standard, but I'm gonna think outside the box.
I'm not going to just be the guy that's clocking in.
I mean, that that's as an outsider reading it.
That's how one takes it.
That's I probably couldn't violently disagree with that view.
No, I think I think yes, there's certainly there's certainly some of that in
me is to to not just be the guy.
Although, you know, to put this in context, Goldman Sachs, to take that as an
example, Goldman Sachs is a very serious, very successful US corporate.
And there's a limit to how outside the box you can think in a bank and quite
rightly to banks are responsible for, you know, a lot of risk for their
customers, they're responsible for fiduciary duty in lots of cases.
You know, yes, you can be a little bit idiosyncratic sometimes, but at
the end of the day, it is a big US corporate.
You know, I want to break apart some of your strategy ideas and how your
firm operates, but I wonder if you would be willing to paint a picture
for me, I'm curious, when I can look at the success of the London CTAs,
the London Quants, those many that have trend following backgrounds, why
did the switch happen?
Why did London become the spot?
You know, for example, so many of the, the longstanding early pioneer
trend following CTAs were from the US.
What, what was the switch flip?
That's a, that's a good question.
It's, it's not one I immediately have an answer for, but I can speculate.
I think in the, if you think about the very early trend following that the
history of the industry is, you know, the very early trend following the
turtles, we're talking mid eighties there, maybe early nineties, the
kickoff for the London or maybe better to call it the European scene,
probably not happened in the mid to late nineties with HL, obviously the
granddaddy of us all, and then in winter and blue trend and aspect and
ourselves and a whole plethora of really great films at firms in Europe.
I think partly the reason why we maybe managed to become more successful or
grew up was more of a scientific approach to investment and statistics.
You know, I, I look back at some of these things that I see in new tattered
books about average true range and breakouts and, and it seems like the
dark ages, you know, we, you know, we are thinking in a much more statistical
sense, much more scientific, I think, and it's not just enough that it
happens to have worked possibly that's, you know, maybe we can think David
Harding and the rest of the team at HL for building that into the
consciousness and then, and then it just takes off.
Why?
So, so the question there is, so why don't, why didn't the CTAs in the
US follow that lead?
You know, I would, I'd clearly believe that a more scientific approach to
investing a rigorous statistical approach to it.
I clearly believe that that's better than just a rule that happens to what
in the past, but it's not clear to me why that would be, that would then
not be transplanted back.
You know, I remember even though, you know, we started in 2006, 2007, you know,
I, I do remember people asking me again, particularly in the States, you
know, why do you wait your positions by risk?
You know, why don't you just take a constant lot quantity, you know, one
lot of this or 10 watts of this and 10 watts of that and 10 watts of the next
thing.
And obviously that's, well, I mean, that's just madness in a world where you have a
contract, like the wheat contract, which is maybe about, I don't know, $20,000 and
the nickel contract, which is $250,000.
I mean, it's just an insane way of doing it, but it was the tradition and our
industry is quite conservative.
You know, the idea of this, there's a small subset of investors who want the new
thing, you know, believe maybe that there's some fabulous technique out there
that's just going to predict what the S&P is going to be tomorrow.
But there are also people who want it to be the way it was and anything that
steps outside that is maybe a little bit different.
Fair enough.
Let me jump into some issues that are near and dear to you, central to how
you look at markets, your trading strategies.
You're talking to clients and you have to tell the new client, and this could
be a very experienced client.
Perhaps they're not experienced with your strategy yet, and you ultimately
have to bring up the conversation of, Hey, look, losses are statistically
inevitable.
You can't get around that fact.
There's still a significant number of people in the population out there,
whether they're very astute about investing or not so astute, they still
don't want to imagine losses as part of the game.
Yeah, people are desperate to invest in something which never loses money.
Well, that is, of course, why Bernard Madoff existed.
There's a great phrase by John Maynard Keynes, where he said, in the
field of fraud and deception, demand creates its own supply.
Everyone is desperate.
Everyone is desperate to invest in something that doesn't lose money.
I'd like to invest in things that don't lose money.
I'd like to come up with a strategy that never loses money.
And of course, we all want that.
But the reality of almost all investing is that, probably, if you're really
good and are really lucky and you've got a very long track record, maybe 20,
30 years, and you've never changed your strategy over that period, which of
course, none of these things are really true for NAB.
Maybe the best you can look for is a shop ratio of 0.8, 0.9, maybe one.
I know that there are some more liquid, say, stat-op strategies, which can
outperform that for a long period of time.
And then, of course, August 2007 happens.
But broadly, a good investment strategy, an outstanding investment strategy, is
something which over a long period of time has a shop ratio of 1.
Investors should really want that.
So, a 20% volatility with an average growth, 20% return, that would be great.
But that does mean something with, say, a 20% volatility, every two years, it's
going to have a drawdown of 15% statistically.
Every four years, it's going to have a drawdown of 20%.
This is just what happens.
Even if the system truly has that return profile, it's going to experience
those kind of drawdowns, and it's going to experience losses.
I have a little spreadsheet that I sometimes show to clients when I'm
discussing this, which, broadly, we don't really use spreadsheets, but it's
a nice little tool, which simulates five years of returns, daily returns, from
something which is a 20% return, 20% volatility process.
So, you know, effectively a Monte Carlo simulation, if you want to call it
that, and every time you press F9 on this spreadsheet, it draws another
graph of another realization of this random but positive process.
You don't have to press F9 very often before you get a history which loses
money in a straight line for five years, which has a 40% drawdown.
And remember, this is something which is guaranteed to make 20% per
annum over the long enough period.
So, the expectation of losses is something that everyone should build
into their investment process at all times, and it's something that
investors do, and, you know, the majority of our investors are
institutions, they are pension funds, they're insurance companies,
they're sovereign wealth funds, they're endowments.
To be very fair to these investors, they are really quite sophisticated,
and they understand that.
And so, I think, you know, sometimes when you're speaking to maybe
high net worth individuals or smaller family offices, the desire there
to protect capital is much stronger.
You have to be extremely clear about the fact that there are things that
will happen in the future, which will be unpleasant.
The other thing you have to do is explain to investors when you're
making money that it probably won't last.
Do you see the demand for that discretionary macro trader hedge fund
that just says, trust me, I have the experience, I can call the
direction, I can position these multiple futures contracts across all
these different markets, just trust my discretion?
Do you see the demand for that waning?
Obviously, by the time somebody's sitting on the other side of the
table for me, they're probably not going to be asking me that question.
And I am, of course, very clear about the facts, particularly when
people say, well, do you take risk off?
Do you put it on?
You know, how about taking off your bond position or adding more of this?
I'm very clear about the fact that I cannot see into the future.
I'm not psychic.
So therefore, I don't have any skill in that.
That my skills lie elsewhere.
There is an argument that at least in terms of positioning longer term,
maybe nobody has skills like that.
Maybe it is just impossible.
I mean, I could certainly argue both sides of that.
I think we're I think the demand for discretionary trading probably
comes from the reactive demand.
It's extremely, it's extremely hard to rate a model.
Well, it's impossible to rate a model.
That can react to every last move in the market or react to a piece of
information that's coming in.
I don't know.
September 11th is probably a very good example of a piece of information
that arrived, the world changed at two minutes past nine and systematic
models knew nothing about it, whereas discretionary traders clearly did.
So in those kinds of events, it's quite possible that discretionary
traders will outperform and I can understand why people have that demand
for it, but it is an extremely difficult job to be a good macro trader.
And, you know, we all know of those people who have great reputations
in doing that, and it's maybe only a handful of people.
Of course, the interesting thing about macro trading is that everyone
wants to be a macro trader.
It's really, it's really interesting when you, when you hear stock
pickers talk discretionary equity, long, short people talk, very often
what they're talking about is macro things.
You know, we think the market's going up.
We think it's going down.
We're doing this.
And then therefore we're going to buy these stocks.
And quite often macro decisions are wrapped up in security analysis,
which they probably shouldn't be.
I really think trading, trading macro on a discretionary basis is one of
the world's hardest jobs, and it's possible that the people who are successful
at it may just be the lucky pennies.
I don't know.
I don't have hugely strong views on this, but I think it is a very hard job.
So the macro discretionary guys, when they hear, and I'm just kind of painting
an illustration, it could be the investors that are hearing from you
for the first time, but the macro discretionary guys, when they hear
that everything you do is systematic from strategy selection, asset allocation,
portfolio construction, position sizing, execution and risk control, that
everything you do at your firm is systematic, that's got to cause some
people to just go, what the blank, how does, there's got to be that, that,
that aha moment of like, hold on.
This is an approach that's different.
I don't think, I don't think we are exceptional.
I think it's, you know, obviously, you know, whilst I know that people who run
my peers well, socially, I don't know what they do and how they sell themselves,
but I would be, I would be surprised if any of the large European CTAs are
talking about how they intervene and what they do and they make some decisions.
The, remember, one way to think about this problem is that, you know, and
there is, there is that little bit from people who are, well, we have
a model, but we occasionally intervene.
My view of that is that, that is not systematic trading.
You know, systematic trading, I've used this phrase before, it's a little
bit like being pregnant, you either are or you aren't, you can't just
be a little bit systematic.
You know, I often say to people who, you know, are maybe pitching me with
systems that are a model that they then put a discretionary overlay on.
I say, well, why don't you just run two books, run the model in one book and
run your discretionary overlay as another book, and then just see which
one makes money.
Once you think about it that way, the decisions are often, this is a way for
people to, to hide really quite complex decisions.
Remember the, the point that what we're all trying to do is we're trying
to say, what's more likely to go up tomorrow and what's more likely
to go down tomorrow.
And that's the decision.
Now, what we have and many other people like us is we have lots of complex or
sometimes simple models, which have been tested statistically over many,
many years, and then they're weighted using very sophisticated weighting
algorithms and cost controlled measures and all of those other things,
literally millions of winds of code running.
And then what we're trying to do is forecast whether or not something's
going to go up or down tomorrow.
Very often people intervene in their models by saying things like, well,
I think vol is going to come off tomorrow or correlation is going to go
up, or I don't think this model is going to work as well tomorrow.
Now that's a very complex statement.
The amount of analysis you would have to do to say that, for example, a
train following model isn't working very well and is unlikely to work
tomorrow, it seems it's, it's so difficult to do that for something
as simple as an asset.
The idea that you can do it for something as complex as a model, which
is running on 120 different assets with various risk weighting and
cost controlled measures on top of it seems to me to be unlikely.
Yeah, fair point.
Fair point.
Why don't you talk about part of your process under the hood in the
sense that you like the idea of proving a strategy, prove a strategy
is broken rather than it's right.
Yeah, I don't think I'm the first person to come up with that in
that, you know, effectively that is the scientific method, which has
been working pretty well for humans since the Greeks came up with it.
Science is about proving things wrong.
Okay.
It's not about proving things right.
What you're trying to do is break your strategy.
You can never really prove that a strategy works or doesn't work.
Finance, despite pundits and newspapers and people on the
television, and maybe even people on podcasts, filling what they say
with certainty, you know, this is going to happen.
This is the best way of doing things.
This is our systems are better than somebody else's systems.
Our stock portfolio is better than somebody else.
I know this, I know that.
Finance is full of all of that.
But in fact, in fact, finance is dominated by randomness.
Randomness is everything.
And so because randomness is everything, you need to be uncertain.
You need to have a lack of conviction and dogma in certain things because
you want to be able to prove that things are wrong.
And so, you know, when we come up with a new strategy or a new idea or a
new trading system, what we're trying to do is, at least in, you know, when
we're simulating it and running it through all of our systems, what we're
trying to do is find out what's wrong with it.
And then if you get what is literally, literally months of testing and
retesting and rethinking about it and thinking about these different
environments and so on, if it gets through months of that, then maybe
it's going to work in the future.
And these are all very weak, uncertain statements, but to a great
extent, our, the philosophy of what we do is around that uncertainty
and conviction.
There's certain things I've got conviction about, obviously, I've got
conviction about the importance of technology.
I've got the conviction about the importance of risk-weighting or
coherent portfolio design, all of those things.
I've got a lot of conviction about it.
I don't have a conviction about any particular technique.
You just do what you think is best and what you think will be persistent.
Yes, I love the way of dealing with uncertainty because it seems like
until the last handful of years in the financial fund management
arena, so many people desire certainty.
And so it's, it's refreshing.
And of course, as you say, you're not the only one.
It's refreshing to hear that I just don't know I'm doing the best that
I can, but I don't know.
And I really don't think anyone else knows.
Yeah, there's a, there's a little phrase that I sometimes use, which is
that the systematic driven is it's what we are trying to do as scientists
in finance is a little bit like sort of dimly being able to forecast
what the weather is going to be like tomorrow.
And it's like meteorology in that sense.
It's full of uncertainty and technology helps and the models aren't
perfect and they don't forecast better than even the biggest computers
in the world don't forecast the weather very well, five days forward.
But meteorologists are trying hard to improve that both in the technology
side and better theories about atmospheric circulation.
And, you know, they're maybe not too bad at forecasting the weather
tomorrow in some places, probably not in the UK because it's so rainy.
But you understand where we are.
In the past, a lot of investment has really been people looking at the sky
and saying, look at that cloud, it looks like a dock.
Yeah, I think our way and people like us are doing it.
I think is it's what we do.
I think it probably captures the realism of the world.
The other way of thinking about this is when very often and rightly,
you know, when something happens, either when you make money or lose money
or, you know, when a model does something or whatever it might be.
There's always a question that everyone asks whether or not it's
internally, people that can't have oil or investors or journalists,
you know, why did this happen?
It's a great question.
Why did this happen?
And what we try and do is approach the problem from the perspective
of the reason why this happened was chance.
Now prove that it wasn't chance.
Very often, that's quite hard.
You know, you have a you have a bad month or you have a great month.
People say, well, what happened?
So can I prove that it's any different from chance?
Quite often, the answer to that question is no.
But it's just it's just a different mindset.
And obviously, you have to approach problems in lots of different ways.
But approaching a problem from the mindset of I think this might just
be a result of random noise.
Let's see if we can prove that it isn't is it's intellectually
satisfying, if nothing else.
I think it's quite a powerful technique.
Let me ask something.
I don't really call it controversial, but I saw this great article
that was about you featured in The New York Times.
And I kind of went through some of the comments and I noticed
some of the comments were highly negative.
And the thrust of the comments were essentially that you don't
bring value to the economy.
And I thought to myself, because I know something about what you
do and what your peers do.
And I thought to myself, those comments misunderstand because
there's so many of your investors, even if they're
institutional investors, are representing the small guy.
I mean, it's the small guy's retirement money that often makes
it into the big institutional account.
And so I think it's it's unusual that maybe people don't
see that, you know, yes, you might not be accepting ma and
pa's retail account.
That's not your position.
But I think someone misses the point and misses the boat when
they make that criticism.
What's your feeling on that?
This is a hard question to answer.
So the question is, you know, are we doing something that is
socially useful?
Are we doing a good thing for the economy?
That's a hard question to answer.
I mean, once you start going down that route, I mean, what is
useful to the economy, you know, are useful to society, the
world only needs one car manufacturer, doesn't need
hundreds of car manufacturers, it doesn't need hundreds of
models. So every car manufacturer is kind of not
doing something useful for the economy.
Nobody really needs an expensive meal at an
expensive restaurant.
So expensive meals and expensive restaurants aren't
really doing anything useful to the economy.
Nobody needs podcasts.
No, we can live without them.
You know, once you get into that, then I think you're
getting into some dangerous water.
We are, I believe, over time, are providing something
which is valuable to our investors.
I think we are doing that as well as we can.
We are constantly trying to add little incremental
improvements that make the returns better.
We won't make money every month, we will make money
every year. And sometimes we'll lose money and
sometimes we'll make money, but we are doing the
best we can to produce positive returns for our
investors. And our investors are, as you say, a
wide variety of people.
They're pension funds.
It's, as you say, mum and dad, as we say here in
the UK, who are investing in this.
And where I feel, although this is not quite the
same as finding a cure for cancer and it's certainly
not the same as landing a probe on a comet to use
something recently, which are fantastic things to
do, this is what we do and we probably at the
margin make the returns of our investors'
portfolios better in some way, either higher or
lower risk or less correlated and so on.
Where I think there's much more problem in people
doing something which is not socially useful is
when relatively simple strategies are dressed up
as something very complex.
People effectively just being an index tracker,
doing normally things, but just actually tracking
the S&P index, but charging 2.20 for it.
That's a very bad thing to do, I think, at least
I believe that what we do is something that is
intellectually rigorous.
It's probably a good thing.
The other thing to remember, of course, is that
trend falling, systematic trading, the money comes
from somewhere.
If we make money for investors, somebody loses it.
And if you lose it, someone's gaining it.
Someone's gaining it.
We would believe and hope that over time we
will make money more often than we lose and
that that will at the time get positive returns.
But it doesn't mean that somebody is losing.
And it's a very hard question to answer.
There's a game out there that everybody can play.
Everyone can pony up to the table and they can
develop a strategy and it is the ultimate game
where everyone can try.
And I'm not just being a homer trying to defend
you from the comment, but I kind of look at it
like, OK, you know what, and I'm not asking
you to say this, but I can draw my conclusions
about those types of critics.
And it's like, hey, if you don't like it, go
try. Ultimately, the libertarian in me is like,
hey, you know, I think we've got a lot of better
things to do on this planet than draw those
types of conclusions.
And perhaps that if you look closely, you can
see those positive things.
But of course, we all know that some people
will never see some positive things.
So you can't convince everybody, right?
That's probably true.
I mean, I'm obviously always wary about
talking about politics in any public forum
because it's not my job to do that.
But, you know, I do believe that we do a
relatively good thing.
We provide, if nothing else, I provide
employment for 50 people in Cambridge, which
is the small business side of what we do as
well. And it's important to remember that this
little community that we have is an employer
and pays people money and does all of those
things as well. So I think whether or not
there is some great good out there that we
will have to aim for, I do believe that we
run good small businesses and that is a
good thing. So I'm very pleased about the
fact. And one of the things I'm very
pleased about is that in 2006, Eric and I sat
in a small office with two computers and a
server that gave us electric shocks every
time we touched it.
And from that, we have built a business.
It's small business and it's a business
that, like any small business, you can go
through bad times and could potentially
go bust. And all of the efforts associated
with running small, small, medium sized
enterprises, we've managed to survive for
eight or nine years now. And I'm really
pleased about that. It's if I'm proud of
anything, I'm proud of that.
Well, that's inspirational. It's
inspirational. I would love you to expand
on the idea. And I think I saw you say
that you, unlike maybe I'm not maybe
peers or other firms out there, you like
to ask clients what they like, you know,
what not necessarily force things on
clients. If you could expand on that,
because clearly some clients are not
going to have the technical market know
how that you do. So there's going to be
some desire for guidance. So maybe I'm
taking a little bit of that out of
context. But could you expand on the
idea of of seeking client feedback for
what they want?
That's maybe taken a little bit out of
context. I think it is important to
understand what your clients utility
function is, to use that scientific
phrase, what are they looking for? What
do they expect from an investment? And
that sort of informs it informs the way
that you explain things to them. Now,
as you say, generally, although all of
our clients are very knowledgeable and
sophisticated in lots of different
areas, and of course, they have to
cover all types of investments and all
types of asset allocation, they're
almost certainly less knowledgeable
than us in the very area that we do
systematic micro trading or systematic
micro trading. So I'm struggling to
remember that particular quote. But I
think that the point here is that you
do have to understand your your
clients drivers, what is it that they
are looking for in their portfolio?
What did they expect? And it isn't a
question of, of us sitting on one side
of the table saying, you know, what do
you want? We've got it. You know, you
just ask, we'll give you that. But
understanding what drives the
decision making process, you know,
who their stakeholders are, what's
mean, there's, we, for example, have,
you know, we have a, we have two
products, we have a original
quantitative fund, which is higher
volatility, 20%. It's higher octane,
it's two and 20 fees. So it's, it's
very much in that mold of high
octane, very diversified, systematic
macro and micro trading. And we also
have another product, which is lower
volatility, it's 10% volatility. It's,
it's much more scalable. It's got
maybe just basic, more basic trend
and more basic value strategies in
there. And it's available to
investors at a half and 10. Now
understanding your investor means
that you can understand what their
internal desires are, what do they
need? You know, maybe they want a
low cost, very functional, but they
want a low cost system where it's
more volatility, and therefore the
headline numbers are smaller. We all
know that investing, investing in a
20% volatility product is, is too
risky. Then all you have to do is
invest half your money in the 20%
volatility product and keep half of
it in your pocket. And you've got a
10% volatility investment. But
somehow that doesn't feel the same
as a 10% volatility product. For
reasons I really don't get, I
mean, the pure mathematician in me
says that's nuts. But nonetheless,
it is, it is true. And I, you
know, I'm human too, obviously, and
I feel that. So, so I think it is
important to understand your
investor, who their stakeholders
are. And by understanding that and
communicating with investors at the
right level for an investor,
nobody, none of our investors needs
to know or cares about the deep
statistical details, which might be
embedded in some nonlinear Bayesian
regression portfolio algorithm. That
sounds great, but they kind of
don't care. And they shouldn't
care about that. But they should
care about things like culture,
technology, people, research
processes. And these are all
things that we can explain and
want to explain in great detail.
And if you can, if you can
understand what your investor needs
and wants, then maybe you can
explain those things better. I
always feel that I'm not really
in that camp of, and our industry
is quite bad at this, the
industry of, well, you know, if I
told you about my models, I'd have
to shoot you. That's quite common.
That sort of, you know, I'd have
to be massively secret, can't tell
you about it. I think that's
wrong. You know, we as an industry
are managing money for people and
it's their money, and they have
the right to know, and we have
the obligation to tell them what
it is we're doing with it.
Yeah, fair point. Fair point. And
I think that probably has been
one of the reasons that you guys
have gone from zero to
significant and fairly short
order in a very competitive
space.
Yes, we have it. We were, you know,
I'll refer you to my previous
thing about randomness. Some of
that is, of course, luck. You
know, we had a good run. We
didn't have such a good year
last year. We're having a good
year this year. These things,
some of this is randomness. But
actually we're, I think, I
mean, apart from being open and
transparent and supportive
investors and all those things
that you have to be, I think the
other strand that runs through
everything we do is that sort of
aggregation of marginal
improvements, little small
marginal improvements that
really enough themselves maybe
just don't make much of a
difference. You know, let's say
we work out some way of saving
ourselves half a basis points
in costs a day. That doesn't
seem like very much half a basis
point. That's that's a tiny
amount of money, but it adds up
to nearly a percent and a half
over the course of a year.
That's great, right? We'll have
that. And lots of those little
marginal improvements are
probably what distinguishes good
funds from less good funds.
Ewan, where can we send
people? People can go find more
about you and your firm,
Contab Capital online. That's
easy enough. And if I'm not
mistaken, I think I saw you
somewhere on Twitter as well.
Yes.
I think I don't really tweet
anything about about finance at
all. Not, you know, I don't
think it's the format of 140
characters is not really ideal
for extensive thought and an
analysis of things. But our
website is a great place to to
find out a lot more about the
firm, you know, the contact
details of there. And that's
that really, I actually quite
like our website, you know, I
think it gives a very good
impression of the firm and how
we work and our culture and the
products that we have. So yeah,
the website is a really good
place to find out about
Contab. And obviously, if any of
your listeners are in Cambridge,
you're more than happy to just
drop in and see it.
Ewan, hey, my pleasure. Thanks
for coming on today. I hope
some of my questions were not
too far out from left field,
right field. I hope you seem
to handle everything with a
plumb and in very smooth and
diplomatically. So the one that
the one though, about the guy
that was the critic, he
actually annoyed me more than
anything, because I just I
was like, Oh, I just want to
strangle him. But
that one of the things you
have to remember in life is
that not everybody's going to
think you get great. Yeah.
Yeah. And, and there are
valid criticisms. You know,
I'm quite phlegmatic about
these things as valid
criticisms about systematic
trading with valid criticisms
about about finance industry
and just, you know, getting
annoyed about it doesn't
help you. You know, you've
got to take those criticisms
on board, understand why
they happen to you. There's
been a lot of, as we know,
when lots of stuff in the
press about bad things
that happened in finance,
people are right to
criticize. No, I'm not going
to get annoyed about it
because maybe some of the
criticisms are valid. You
know, we don't have a, we
certainly don't have an
monopoly on the truth. No,
but as somebody who's
watched this particular
space for a long time and
going back many, many
decades, I think there is
something noble about the
systematic guys that have
done this for a long time.
I think there's something
as you talk about the bad
things in the finance
space, the made offs of
the world or a particular
strategy that blew up that
wasn't so great. There is
something generally
consistent that you can
kind of hang on to in this
systematic space. Like you
said, though, maybe
things break and it all
falls apart at some point
in time, but knock on wood
for several decades or
more. It's, it's done
pretty well.
I think we'll probably
summarize it as, you know,
I think people in the
systematic space, we try
harder, you know, to use
that, to use that old
Davis ad, we do try. Now,
I know, I know just about
everyone in the European
space. I know that
everyone is completely
focused on just doing the
best thing they can. And
I think that's great. You
know, there's, there's
very few, there's few
parts that we never met
any sort of charlatans or
people are just knocking
together any old rubbish
just so that they can
raise some assets. People
try really hard and
sometimes we fail. But on
average, I think the
industry succeeds. And the
industry's been in the
doldrums for two or three
years. You know, there's
been trend following in
particular hasn't formed
very well for probably the
last three years. It's
performing very well in the
last three months.
That's how it goes,
though, right? It's you
know, you know, it's not
necessarily consistency. It
can just come boom, and
you all of a sudden have a
September of 2014. And
everyone goes, where'd
that come from? Hold on,
that's trend following.
That's the way it works.
That's an interesting
thing for, for people. You
know, I, I explain here
when people say trend
following hasn't worked
for three years, he take
a simple trend following
model and just run it
across 100 assets. When
trend following is working
really well, it's maybe
working on 60 assets and
not working on 40. And
when it's not working,
it's, it's working on 45
assets and not working on
55 assets. So there's never
really been a period in
history where trend
following hasn't worked on
something. It just hasn't
worked enough. And now,
of course, we're in a
situation where, and I've
got to be careful always
to say, you know, we're
not a trend follower alone,
we do lots of other stuff,
but, you know, trends in
bonds, trends in eggs,
trends in the yen,
trends in energy. I mean,
this is all working out
really well. And we're in
one of those golden
periods where trends are
working on quite a lot of
different things. That too
won't, won't last. Over
time, you know, there'll
be, there'll be ups and
downs. But over a long
enough period of time,
trend following and more
generally systematic
macro trading has done
incredibly well. And
presumably, and this is
the little scientist and
uncertainty in me coming
out, and presumably with
a reasonable degree of
probability, it will
continue to work in the
future.
Hey, look, if you, if
anyone out there looks at
a systematic quant track
record, and it's all
black ink, then you've
got trouble.
I refer you to my
previous answer about
Bernard Madoff.
Hey, you, and it was a
pleasure having you on
today. Thank you for
providing some, some
great insights and
experience to my
audience.
It was my, it was my
pleasure, Michael. Thank
you very much.
Thank you. Take care.


# Chapter 61

Are you still in God knows where country? Oh, I love it. I love it. You know, well, let's just leave it like that
I think that keeps the audience guessing God knows where country will circle back on the back end
Maybe we got some extra time and talk about that
Hey, let me jump right in to the to the heart of the matter when I had you and Larry on in the spring
I think we were right in the middle of the weekly parade of 26 year old
Financial Times reporters writing about trend following is dead and then something funny happened along the way to the parade this summer
Even in a zero interest rate environment in a relatively low volatility environment all of a sudden you and your peers
Have started to make quite a bit of trend following money
And I know we don't want this to sound like an infomercial
But I think it's educational in the sense that a lot of people probably don't know
That when you see all these epithets and obituaries written in about trend following. Well, it just hasn't worked out that way. Has it Alex?
You know, I've been around long enough to probably seen four or five of these obituaries written maybe even more over the years and
And we're still here last three or four months things in trend following space are
Pretty good, but this is the nature. We've seen this in our 800 year study
Right. This is not some voodoo
Sort of arbitrage strategy that extracts
something from
Some somewhere that you know, that's not understood where it could just easily end
this is a strategy that harvests natural occurrence in markets and
You know, the only way you can I guess permanently kill a trend following strategy is to declare all markets
to go sideways forever or to declare that
no market will ever move significantly away from some sort of
equilibrium and
It just doesn't happen for long enough periods of time
No, and things move more than as I'm sitting here. I'm looking at the
Yield of the 10-year note and you know all prognosticators would have said that all that can't go to where it is now and
Here it is, but that's the nature of trend following
Yeah, look at something like crude oil. I mean I probably there's been all kinds of fundamental opinions about why
Oil has to go up or why it's at the right price and this and that and then
Wham bam. Thank you, ma'am. The price is dropping pretty significantly, isn't it?
Yeah, nobody knows where it's gonna go, but it's it's just a nature of people to figure. Okay
Things are just not gonna move far away from where they are yet
The same people will invest most of their money stocks and hope that they'll go up a hundred percent
You know, this is why this kind of strategy
Adds value over time. For example, I mean we're sitting here now October
14 just in recent days the equity markets have made
you know not major collapses but
material material downturn and
You know things are okay in the trend following space
You know, we're actually making money. So that's at the end of day the value of this kind of strategy
And I think it's it's important for people to realize you're not saying
That you know, what's gonna happen tomorrow. You're not saying that stocks are gonna continue to go down
But I think what we're gonna try and point out in this conversation is there's another way to think except being only long stocks
there's there's something else out there and you've been in the middle of that something else for a long time and before we
break apart some of the bigger picture issues in your new book trend following with managed futures and
I would love you to go back in time a little bit and I know you're not a big fan of any kind of personal stories
And stuff like that. I know your personality a little kind of just a fax guy and I love that and your book
Definitely puts that forth out there. But you know, you work
with
One of the most colorful people that I've ever met. I
Would love for you to talk about
Your first meeting how old you were your background and your first meeting with Larry height and how you guys have come to have this great
Career together. It's really a fun story and then we'll get into the book and get into some of the the meteor issues
But I think the audience would love to hear that story
Yeah, it was kind of a fork in a road that as I look back
You know the joke if you get to a fork in a road you take it
I came to interview with Larry in in 1989
I was just a kid out of school. I didn't know anything about trend following or
Certainly not managed futures or details. I just needed a job
I think I was making $28,000 a year and Larry offered me 32. I still have the offer sheet
Hold on. I know you say just out of school you 22 26 grad school undergrad 20 21 22. Okay young guy. Yeah
Didn't really know Larry height was
What this was in Milburn, New Jersey and
he was one of the guys that interviewed me that they really interesting thing is that the
Market Wizards book was had either just come out or was coming out
I don't recall whether there was the actual book on the shelf or a draft of the book on the shelf
But somebody gave me in the office the chapter about Larry to read while I was kind of like waiting
and I remember just flipping to
I'm paraphrasing Jack Stryker's question something like what's your edge or something like that and
as somewhat of a scientist out of school, I would normally have expected some
Quite scientific answer because I kind of heard that meant that something quantitative. So some sort of rocket science answer for
For what people did in in in 1989?
but then I read this
Psychology stuff about how we know what we don't know. I
Was like you've got to be kidding me. What am I doing here? That was a line from Larry
That was a line from Larry. Yeah, Larry said that his edges
He knows what he doesn't know and you're reading this before you go into the interview
Yeah, I'm reading this before I'm going into the interview. The interview was kind of like
Okay, you know whatever go home, but then
You know like typically you have to follow up and write a letter or email is great interview
You know or tell the headhunter that I really want this job and I couldn't figure out whether I really wanted to tell him that
I really wanted this job because
Actually, I was confused
But you know, this is actually now I see now no different than the initial confusion
Larry gives he was he gave a talk in my class at Columbia last week. I teach a class at Columbia
He gave a talk to a bunch of grad students and he confused the hell out of them, too
Because it takes time to sink in he makes those simple statements
But the depth of those simple statements is not to be underestimated
Yeah, it's you know later on. I've obviously learned what all that means. It's the respect for risk and
not getting very emotional attached emotionally attached to any one strategy and
Those kind of things which allow you to survive for decades and decades in in the markets
but initially
just like last week in my class, you know, I have 80 90 graduate school PhD students and here comes the market wizard and
they start asking him what they things that they think a market was it should know like where gold is going next week or
Which way the market is going because he's some sort of a wizard
And he of course says he has no idea
He just needs to know what he doesn't know and if he gets into a trade and if he's and if he's wrong
Then he has to get out of it
You know it, but it is so
Powerful, but yet so simple so to go to back to my story me really
It's the fact that he offered me a couple thousand dollars more that I ended up taking the job, but I I really had no idea
No way to appreciate that and no idea how to judge
It really meant or what Larry did I just so I just you know, I dove in that's
How quickly did you know once you were hired and you got into the office and you're around Larry?
How quickly did you know this was going to possibly be your passion for the rest of your career?
How quickly did you start to have that feeling? I mean probably still took a couple years. I mean I saw the systems making money
but I
Took a couple years to kind of sink in what?
This is about I was like most probably geeks in the beginning and just trying to find the Holy Grail
But it's you know your realization that
No matter how smart you are. I mean I see this with all my students. You know I I
Joke that I try to bring their IQ down
After they take my class rather than go up obviously their IQ is high to begin with but
Kind of investment IQ they if you think you know
everything you'll just end up failing so
It took a while to establish kind of like the right mental equilibrium. This is by the way
It's hard to hire right people in
In this kind of area because you need combination of two things that almost never go
And almost never go together, which is very very smart people that are also very very humble
No, and so you have to survive in this business
I think you need to have the right balance if you get too smart and not humble enough you get too emotionally attached
You know there's lots of people out there in the world who are very humble, but maybe not smart enough to do
You know at least the basic arithmetic of the strategies
So it took me actually a while to sink in but I you know I know I've been at this for 25 years
and learn not to get too emotionally attached to you know people declaring trend following dead and
Any of those kinds of things, but you know on the other hand not to feel like we're walking on water one
Well 30% on the year these things come and go but over time it it works
But I wanted to Mike I wanted to make one point about trend following that I think is
It's confusing to people
They focus too much on I know the SMP or that market obviously because it's in everybody's portfolios
but they think okay the value of trend following is just kind of like to time the short side of the S&P or
Get them out of the long only
I
Have a lot of allocators who are asking me. Well. What's my position in the S&P and
If I say I'm long because trend following is long then they say oh, but that's not a diversifying investment
What why do I need trend following?
and if I say I'm short then they say okay, maybe that's too late and they try to
Overthink this the value of trend following is not
Just getting the right side of the S&P trade
It may or may not happen. The truth is that the systems are not that great in any one market
The value of trend following is that we can do this over
150 markets or however many markets one can find and really have a
Diversified uncorrelated investment. I mean that's what this is about
That's why it's worked. You know in our book for
800 years if you look back at my first experience with
Equity market kind of shocks. It was in 1987
Mint made 60% in that year. This was you know before I started at mint, so this is in history books
but doesn't didn't make that from
necessarily timing the
Was it black Monday October or was it 19th or something crash?
It made its money and have some corn trades and other things and other markets and
Same thing, you know 102 same thing in 2008 the value of this of trend following
You know, it's not a one market thing. It's it's a harvesting of natural
human behavior in
150 different markets, you know Alex let me interject there. I think there's been and curious your opinion on this
There's been quite a few you see papers about trend following the classical CTA
Diversified across markets like you're talking about like also in the last bunch of years
There's been a lot of papers about momentum and they specifically focus only on equities
I actually so I think there's some confusion comes from some of the academic work where it's been attempting to
Attach momentum only to an equity perspective and ignoring what you're talking about is this great diversification
Yes, so maybe this is a slightly nerdy for the audience, but there is a difference between
so called cross sectional momentum
Which is almost what all academic papers?
Hit when the equities this would be some kind of relative one stock to another and
More of the time series kind of momentum, which is what trend following is
We just trend follow any given market whether it's going up and down really unrelated to other markets
It's related in terms of the correlation and how much you risk
But not in terms of the signal we can have no position in all markets except for one
You know all these equity papers are dealing with this cross sectional momentum where you?
Compare one stock to another and things like that and they get into the efficient markets of whether it should exist doesn't exist
it's over over complicating things when we have 800 years of data and
Simple not simple strategies, but simple concepts
You buy high and you sell higher, and you know you sell you short one is going down, and you cover lower
That works in fact one of the academic papers out there called by one of our competitors actually calls it time serious momentum
That's what this is by the way anything in equities is
Invariably probably going to correlate to equities even if you try to make it uncorrelated to equities
You know what adds value is trend following?
whether it's bonds or commodities or emissions or iron ore or
Obviously currencies all these other markets, and then people ask me well
What about the interventions and the government this and the government that and meanwhile look where the bond yields are and how far they've gone?
You know things can go
Quite far the subtitle of your book the phrase crisis alpha is in the subtitle
So it's clear. It's clear that anybody that looks at the data that during these crises periods
That trend following the type of trim hung that we're talking about this time series does perform exceptionally well
There's no guarantee that things will work out that way, but it's performed that way
But what's interesting about this summer the last bunch of months we really weren't at a crisis period
But there still was trend following performance coming out as I mentioned at the beginning of this this podcast
From kind of a fairly low volatility
Zero interest rate environment, so it's not if somebody was to couch trend following as only crisis alpha that would be a mistake
Would it not be?
Yes, in fact some people in our space have tried to make some kind of an excuse for
Some lackluster performance by calling this a tail hedge and saying well. There was no tail. That's a total mistake
trend following has you know two
Two great features that you probably can't find in almost any other investment first. It's just it's totally
Uncorrelated so if you start with that you look at the history of trend following for 10 years 20 years
800 years it generates a return stream with
Zero to slightly negative correlation to all other asset classes, so let's just if we take that as given
Is it that's just live when you have 800 years of data. I mean it's pretty close to given
It's a totally uncorrelated
it also
happens to be
Quite negatively correlated in many periods when
You want the negative correlation?
Which is the crisis periods because it tends to make money from?
Whether it's inflation shocks or downturns and equities or something else going on somewhere
You know typically volatility picks up during those periods, and it makes money somewhere
But it's not only that you could take out all the crisis alpha periods
Or all the crisis periods, and it's still a great investment
argue, it's it's a liquid investment because we trade liquid markets and
so
You know people will go in their 401k plan and have
5,000 versions of the same thing
Right small cap long small cap mid cap Smith cap
I I heard this term reads a Smith cap small to mid cap or you know
Large cap and international and this and that and I mean how many versions are there of being long only?
Which are all call it 80 90 percent correlated
70% correlated at least of course you get a little diversification from that so fair enough
But imagine in that same 401k plan or whatever list of instruments now
There was something you know called XYZ it wasn't labeled trend following and somebody remembers
Oh, I read something bad about trend following. It's just another investment another mutual fund or another
Fund that somebody can put their money into and you look at and say wow
This thing is just different, and it tends to work when other things don't
Well, I you know well how close so much closer. Do you get to a holy grail?
I don't think maybe that's too strong of a statement, but in terms of the possibilities of what one can invest in
How much better does it can it be it totally diversifying and?
There's a good chance no guarantee, but there's a good chance that it will perform in the periods when other things
Don't so you know you go back to optimization 101
any kind of
Optimization of the portfolio should tell you to have
Some allocation to that thing in fact we're writing a paper right now
On the topic of how costly is it to not have trend following in your portfolio?
You know how much do you give up by actually not having it not in any particular year, but over time?
and it's quite costly because you're
actually avoiding a
tremendously diversifying asset class
Let me let me jump into the idea of benchmarking and specifically those institutional managers out there that
That really are fixated on stocks, and they look at the world through the prism of stocks a long only prism and
You your firm has to deal with that you it's a constant education process
And if you look at a situation like CalPERS
They had a very small percentage relatively speaking with perhaps managers like ISAM
I'm not sure if they had it
I'm not saying that I don't know if they had an investment with ISAM or not
But I'm just saying in general a trend following and it might have even been too small to even make a difference
how in the world
That's not the best way to say, but how can a firm like your firm how someone like me
It's trying to spread these messages to get these
These institutional players that control so many assets in the long only space and and they're only worried about their career
Risk frankly to make the smart decision to make the wise decision
I wonder if you could maybe relay a story or how you talk to people
Watching people convert or watching people not convert to this way of thinking I know it's kind of a big big question
But I'm sure you see where I'm going
Yeah, I mean we do this all day long and some people I mean we have
major pension fund investors, so
Some people get it. It's interesting that in some parts of the world
Maybe it's Australia
Canada
You know Middle East. I'm just kind of maybe part of the world that you're in
Japan kind of area historically have been
Kind of diversification friendly. It's almost like sort of a mental mindset. Maybe because
Well, the Japanese market certainly hasn't been going up in a straight line, right?
They have a lot of currency kind of movements and they just those parts of the world are
It's a friendly to the concept of the reciprocation, right?
Trend following will follow from there, but you first have to have the concept of moving somebody away from
100% equities, right?
the US is somehow just
this you know
Emotionally attached to this idea that you know everything just will
Go up forever
Obviously some institutions have allocations
To this the copper thing by the way probably was not a managed futures issue was just the size of the
Hedge funds they actually were had a decent allocation to manage futures
but anyway, some institutions are
It really depends on their appetite for
Embracing
diversification and
As you use the word benchmark whether
some form of diversification is
In the benchmark, so I mean we look at this, you know, what's the benchmark of the
Institution of the benchmark doesn't allow for this kind of diversification then
We can talk to them till a cow's come home. They probably won't risk their career by by putting it in
Because at the end of day at 1% allocation the trend following is not going to make any difference
which has to be
5 10, you know, and we have institutions who have
Investments with us or with some of our peers at that level
but their investment committee has embraced that in terms of their benchmark and
they've just in general embraced the concept of
the reciprocation to some people it's like so obvious like
Well, I can't believe that we even considered not doing it and to some people it's just like okay stocks go off forever
So why do I need to bother I?
Sometimes think that it would it would take a Japanese style stock market perhaps
To really get some people to say we have to change. I think as long as is there's gonna be some people out there
There's long as equities go up
Seemingly in a straight line, even though there's been some 50% drawdowns last 15 years
They're gonna be hard to convince aren't they?
Yeah, and you know us I mean a NASDAQ is in a what is it 15 16 17 year drawdown, but it's just this
This especially in the US like no matter what it's just all about
Equities go straight up equities go straight up equities will go straight up. You know, I don't know if it'll take a Japanese type of
Downturn but some sort of a shock
In the system, but again, I don't I'm trying to tell people it's not that
You just have to have that shock it just imagine you have imagine I call this
You know regular mutual fund, you know, why not have a diversifying
Uncorrelated investment in your portfolio that can it can do well with other things don't you know
Just you don't have to appeal to somebody sense that
Wow, this is only gonna make money if you go down a hundred percent people try to overthink
The environmental factors for trend following and then they try to time them
Like some people just got that into their heads that this only works when the volatility is high
Well, you said a minute ago that you know has a volatility hasn't been particularly high recently and we've done well
There's no law that says a market cannot go. There's no law that says crude oil can't go from, you know
100 something down to
Where is it now 85 or something like that in?
a smooth fairly smooth line
Don't have to have massive volatility. There was a stomach virus affected lean hogs earlier this year and
made prices go way up in not particularly with tremendous volatility. It was just a
Fundamental event this whole down movement in interest rates over the years
Hasn't been particularly highly volatile
So people think oh well some people somebody said the oh this strategy only works in high volatility environment
So I'll wait till there's a high volatility environment. Well, things are not that easy
By the time you get to a high volatility environment, you know, or it doesn't work because oh
You have too much intervention. Well, wait a second
The intervention has caused the biggest trend of all time and fixed income so that they want to trade your trend following strategy
Huh that they want to trade you?
Yeah, they want to trade me, you know people years ago used to want to time equity markets, too
Remember that people will try to time equity markets get in and out, you know fun timing all this
That's it's just it's not that simple. It's not supposed to be that simple
what you're supposed to do is have a handful of diversifying investments and
You know, that's what's gonna
Take your portfolio to the promised land not try to time
Back the worst thing you can do
I mean I tell people that the worst thing you can do is to trend follow a trend follower
Right to try to time it that when they're doing well, I should give them more money and when they're doing poorly
I should take money away. That is actually the worst kind of investment you can make
Let me shift gears on you again. I think you're fairly clear on your opinion there the science of trend following
So we talk in the beginning of this conversation you meeting Larry you talk about being a teacher
You have many many PhD candidate students at Columbia
So let's say hypothetically so you're because you're you're the top guy now or one of the top guys now
So they come to the office the the new employee comes to the office obviously in this day and age
They're gonna know something about ISM
They're gonna know something about you. They're gonna know something about Larry before they sit down with you, but
You have to introduce the science of trend following to that new candidate that new person that you want to join your team
How do you start? I know this can go on for a long time
This is there's no way we can even break apart your book the density of your book as I told I told Katie
I said, you know this you guys have put down the academic treatise that I don't know who's gonna attempt to compete with but how do
You introduce to that new person in your office the science of trend following science and investing
This has been a relatively new phenomena that people connect these words together
No in the book. We have all these things like
adaptive markets hypothesis and behavioral theory and and things like that
but at the end of day what I would tell people is that the markets are a
You know some sort of a risk transfer mechanism you cannot assume that
Just because you're smart you will suck money out of the markets, right?
If you think of it like a poker game, you know, it could be a zero-sum game. You could be the best player
But then your profits will come down not because your skill goes down but because the other people at the table will just leave
the game, so
is it a game of
Zero-sum kind of outsmarting people or is it a natural?
Phenomenon in the in the markets almost kind of like providing insurance
Larry talks about this in our last talk about
You know relating trend following to insurance. So I just say that okay. There are natural
Occurring things in the markets. Let's start with something other than trend following. So even analogy value investing, right?
It's been scientifically. Dare. I say proven or shown with data that
value investing works because a lot of investors don't want to hold those stocks
when they go down and you actually earn a
Economic rent type of risk premium if you hold them
There are other examples in the markets where you're actually providing value
To the markets by doing a certain thing. That's what makes it lasting, right? Because there's no way for 800 years
You could find some gimmick
That makes money where you would only do that if nobody else knew about it
There's no way you can get away with every hundred years, right? Somebody from my class will figure it out and it'll be gone
This happens a lot with with some, you know, high frequency and those things like that. So the science is
The natural element of is that what we're actually doing what trend following is actually doing is providing liquidity
to
The hedger's and it's it's creating an equilibrium in in the markets and we have to get paid for that
That's why this works for
800 years if the price of oil for example is going up
Right now it's going down. But if it's going up
No airline companies will almost certainly
Need to sell oil to lock in a future price, right? They're not in the business of
Counter trending. They just need to sell it to lock in the future price. We at that point buy it
Maybe it gets us a little technical but just it's conceptually
Establishing the fact that it's it's it's a natural
Occurring thing the markets need players like us
Otherwise you just have a whole bunch of hedger is that
You know just the markets won't exist. You haven't used the word speculation your speculators
Yeah, we're speculators and then you know, actually we're talking in the book. It's there's hedger speculator
Risk transfer and you need to have this but it cannot be you know
If you think about kind of evolutionary things, it cannot be a free lunch, you know
If I made money and every single trend following trade the hedger's will stop hedging, you know
Sometimes their hedge turns out to be a good idea. Sometimes they would have turned out better not to have hedged
Sometimes, you know, I will look better if I bought oil or I look better if I somehow ignored that trade
Of course, we take all trend following trades, but it's supposed to be slightly painful
But you know in the end if you look at the 800 years the data shows that the equilibrium risk adjuster returns
Are pretty good, you know, they're slightly painful. That's why you can have a
Couple bad years or you can have drawdowns, you know
It's it's if it was too good
You would have every hedger hiring a quant from my class and run, you know moving average systems to time their hedges
But it's just it's the equilibrium of the markets that establishes this this principle
Then that's what makes it work over 800 years. But trend following is
Almost unique in that area. I know you talked to Katie about
divergent and convergent a
Lot of convergent type strategies are very limited in their capacity
Very limited in what they can do because if five other people discover it
It could be gone
This is it's just this is just a natural thing you call the hedger speculator. So that's I
Think that's a good answer. That's how I start with the fact. I just hired somebody from my
Class that started working with me. That's how we
Described it. It's a naturally occurring
Phenomenon in the markets then it's just a matter of a handful of different ways of actually capturing it
but
It's there it it almost cannot go away. It can temporarily on a mark-to-market basis not work
But it just structurally
Can not disappear. Otherwise, you might as well shut down the markets and go back to communism
Well, hey, you know, that's a great lead-in to where I wanted to go
I have a few big-picture trend following type questions left
But since you had told me I knew by your accent you were born in the former Soviet Union
What country were you born announced? Well, actually I don't know. No, no
It's I've had my passport changed several times. My u.s. Passport originally used to say USSR
Because I came to the US when the USSR still existed. So
Technically, I was born in the former Soviet Union, but then they called me up and I said, okay
we need to change your passport because this new country got created called Ukraine and
now we have to
Reprint your passport and now it says born in Ukraine
But now but but but now with what's going on there, right?
I mean they might call me tomorrow and say, okay
We have to read reprint your cut your passport. Now you were born in I know Russia or something else
Here's where I want to go with though bringing it up though is not just for a kind of a silly reason or a flippant reason
so
Do you feel like though in your career? I don't know what age did you come to America?
12 12. Do you feel like you've had I just
Relay a personal I mean you nice achievement in your life nice successful career
They think a lot of people would would say gosh, you know, I I wish I knew how to make those steps
Did you have an advantage coming from where you came was there was there a built-in drive or motivation that that you think gave you
An advantage over other peers that you might have seen in America once you got to America
Well, I guess I know probably don't don't have hours speak about the immigrant drive but right that's the
you know, that's the immigrant immigrant drive that got me to I know maybe going on interviews in an
Area that I had no cool about because I could maybe make more money
I mean at that time point it was like sort of survival and making
money kind of thing not this grand idea I'm gonna become a
Finance, you know person. So it's just the you know bouncing around from
Washing dishes to friendlies, which was my first job
To this and that to pay for school. Certainly my parents didn't have
Money to really you know pay for anything back then so it's just but that's just it's just like the inherent
immigrant drive to keep
To keep pushing I had a job before I went to interview for Larry
But you know, I just I wanted to do you know to do better
I don't know if there was any other advantage other than just
Keep pushing. Keep driving, you know, don't assume I'm gonna just sort of somebody's gonna hand it to you
Larry, you know probably you've heard stories from him, you know, he had a disadvantage
with not being able to see and and and those kinds of things I
Had a small disadvantage in the beginning I couldn't even speak English
So that's why I had a dishwashing job. Nobody had to tell me what to do
There's a pile of dishes then I had to wash them meeting Larry was opera an opportunistic
Type thing because let's face it. I mean I know I know from when I first met Larry
I mean he gave me so much of his time and energy and we met so many times and
I just feel like you know Larry's the type of guy that if he sees somebody trying and really pushing
Larry's the kind of guy that reaches down and says, okay, I'll give you my time. If you're really hungry
I'll give you my time and you know, I I feel very fortunate to have met
Larry have not spent as much time around him as you of course, but I still it's changed my life to meet people like Larry I
started in at men
Not as some kind of a massive. I started as a
technical guy
Doing some side base
Programming. I was kind of like a you know, quite a low-level person
could have stayed as a
technologist for
Any number of years, but again, it's that it's that drive to
See what else I mean, I moved into you know hung close to Larry got to know about all these
you know know what you don't know what he means I kept asking him about it and
You know, that's how I moved up. So I grabbed my opportunities. But again, that's
That's not a Russian thing per se. It's just
It's the debt again, I call it the immigrant, you know the immigrant drive I
Gotta go get it. It's not gonna otherwise not gonna come to me
My great-grandfather came from Lithuania in the early 1900s and they were in coal mines in Scranton and his kids became doctors and engineers
So it happens quick when they got the drive, huh?
But I was really at the end. They were look back just just trend following, you know washing dishes
Obviously wasn't gonna make me money. So I had to cut the loss there
Right. I did work for one year out of school in an engineering role
I worked for RCA on high-definition television because I did green electrical engineering
It was not losing me money per se. So it's not technically a losing trade, but we're just not gonna take me anywhere
So I had to cut my quote-unquote losses there. So, you know, I just trend followed my way into this
No trend following is just a good
General philosophy of life, right? It's not just done on markets. I
Mean, it's how people live. Anyway, this is why mark this is why trend following in the markets works because that's how people
That's how people are I
Want to talk about getting some some meteor issues
So when people look at trend following performance across the many managers out there and we don't have to name names
People can go look at the performance. It's all freely available
I know often I can see up and down months where you can see okay trend following traders had a good month
You might see double the return for one particular trader versus another but still
It's pretty easy to see that there's there's dispersion amongst trend following CTA trend following managers
What do you talk about the idea of that dispersion?
Yeah, it's by analogy to equities. It's actually very simple initially. This is complicated. This is why
Actually a reason why a lot of sophisticated investors like the institutions you asked me about I have a hard time getting in
Because they feel like they might make dumb decisions about the space and end up picking the so-called wrong manager the wrong trend follower
Because they have no kind of like no understanding of what causes differences in
In performance and they get a little emotional. What makes one manager better than the other well
Is it who made more money last year? Does that make them better?
So they just don't know how to step in but actually if you I mean just need to read one or two chapters in the book
It's actually not that complicated if you just make yourself aware. There's a couple factors that drive
Performance for example in the late 90s in equities by analogy to equities
The late 90s, so this is where you know every internet stock went up 100% every day and every brick-and-mortar stock
Stayed flatter one down right so you had this so-called dispersion between value and growth most investors understand that
That's why they'll have both in the portfolio
Sometimes you have dispersion between small cap and large cap
So if you if you make just a few
Let's call them sub
Indifications, so it's not just okay trend follower 1 trend follower 2 trend follower 3
Okay, those are the trend followers, but they have a particular focus
So if this was equity manager 1 2 3 the first one might have been growth focus
The second one might be value focus a third might be small cap for it might be large cap
There's gonna be some correlation between them because those guys are in the stock market
But there's gonna be some fair degree of dispersion and in a year like 1999 could have been a hundred percent degree in dispersion
So now investors in long only
Say okay
I go to my morning star little matrix and then I need a little bit of value a little bit of growth
So I kind of diversify
same thing in the trend following space you just kind of do a little bit of analysis and
Say for example the words are not the same so it's not value growth
It's for example. We introduce certain factors in the book like the speed of trading
So you could do trend following
quite slow
because either by choice or
If you manage lots of money
Maybe you have to be a little bit slower because of the size of your assets, or you can be a little bit faster
And you can get some different results, and you can attribute them to the speed of trading
Okay
you can also have a
Market mix
Kind of bias you could trade only kind of like the large markets again either by choice or because you're big or you can be
Quite a bit more diversified like for example. We are trading a lot of smaller markets well sometimes
those will cause performance differences and so
Really if you just track a few of these things
If you have to pick one trend follower like V1
Okay, you have to I guess interview them all and somehow pick V1
But if you would like to have a portfolio of two or three kind of a diversified portfolio of trend followers
it's not that hard just look at a couple of these factors and
Who still did too slow and who still did too fast and these kinds of things and?
You think that that helps?
Your audience is just by analogy to like the whole value growth thing
Just this a little bit of effort, and then that can explain
Quite a bit of the dispersion between the managers. It's not just
Sort of random because people are sometimes afraid well wait you have eight guys doing the same thing
And you have like this massive difference in performance. I don't know what what is it some guy has a
Faster machine or bigger computers and like they get scared because well they picked the wrong one. What is it?
It's not that they're doing conceptually the same thing, but they have certain portfolio tilts
That can cause these differences and we're just a little bit of effort one can
One can understand them and speaking of a little bit of effort, and this is not a plug necessarily
But if people want to dig into even more of where you are going with all these issues
They're really gonna have to pick up your book and like I said it's not a plug
I mean for relatively speaking for the price of admission you just you just don't get that combination of words
I mean as a guy who's done some some work in this arena
What you guys put together is substantial to say the least one last question Alex. It's all the rage in
the conversations the media
Fed watching
Discussion for the last bunch of months rate hikes interest rates going up now
I'm curious because my first thought would be and I think this has got some truth to it
We don't necessarily know what's gonna happen if there's gonna be a higher rate environment
We don't necessarily know how that's gonna affect turn volume
Give me your opinion. What's your thought process there?
We've looked at it over the 800 year data set what happens in rising interest rate environments, but let's let's ask this question you think
Equities might do well in that environment. I'm no prognosticator, but you know maybe it's certainly it's possible that they won't write
Will bonds do well in that environment? Well almost certainly not right because rates go up then like bonds have to go down
So I would I would put trend following is maybe one of the few things that might do well
But let's let's let's let's talk about this for a few seconds right trend followers are agnostic to the direction. So if
Yields go up. So the prices go down. We will be short bonds now. It hasn't
Happened for many years that there have been a substantial hikes in the markets, but if you look at the data
We have data on interest rates from 1395 Venice issued bonds in in 1395 called Venetian bond
so we have centuries and centuries of data plenty of rising rates environments and
I'll just simply say we will make money being short bonds if that happens
Now people ask technical questions if you short bonds you short carry will that hurt you?
I mean the chapter explains on that sex explains what that is. It's not really gonna hurt us
There's gonna be almost certainly
Inflationary pressure somewhere, so we probably make money off commodities
There'll be you know some interest we get on cash as it's a technicality
But most trend followers put up t-bills as margin, so we'll make more money on margin
We'll make more money on something called a roll yield in
Commodities because we have to roll futures contracts when you put all this together
It
Should be pretty good. At least we have a pretty good chance of making money a better chance of making money in a rising rate environment
then
Then a fixed income portfolio. Let's put it that way, you know and meanwhile
Look some macro funds out there and not naming names have been betting on a rising rate environment for
How long I know what lead let's say a lot of this year and they'd be losing money on that
So look at the perils of timing of course at some point rates will go up, right?
It has to be a truism maybe in our next life or something, but that's some point they have to go up
But look at Japan. I mean
Where's a law that says 10 year rates in US can't go down more. I don't know
Meanwhile, you know, we're making quite a bit of money on the trend that's in front of us now
when it turns there'll be a little bit of pain when the turn and then
We'll make money the other way
It's this is the perils of timing because you could sit there frozen like a deer in headlights, you know
Avoiding, you know ignoring what's going on now not making money out of it out of it betting on a rate hike
When is it gonna happen? I mean yesterday already the Fed made some
announcement and now the market thinks is gonna happen later. I
Mean no windows at a time those things. So just let a trend following system time it and meanwhile
Let's take money. Let's take the money put in our pocket from rates going down. What's wrong with that?
I think what's so fun about this conversation is that it's been very plain talk
I think you've explained these issues just really nice where people can walk away and say
Wow, I wrap my arms around that in a much better way than perhaps I did before listening
But then if they want to know the depth
Getting back to the original idea of when Larry would introduce you to these simple concepts and then you found out the depth
You know you and Catherine have put that depth in a text and I'm curious
I don't know if you're talking off the top of your head. How many words are in that in your not sure it's 400 pages now
I would just I would suggest for your readers that first of all, don't try to read front to back
You know all at once there is a I'm not plugging for Amazon or Wiley
but the Kindle version is
Well, it's a little cheaper, but be it's actually in color
so just to let your audience know it's because the book is you know quite thick it has a lot of graphs and charts and
I noticed the version that's on the internet on the Kindle in color in online is in color
And I'm just might make an easier read
But you know it's a lot of words a lot of topics
But it's actually not that
You know it's not that complicated if you skip a few formulas
It's got a little depth to it Alex
Yeah for people who need it you know but again for a lot of people would just say look
You know can just I can just and I've had conversations with prospective investors from simple to very very sophisticated
You know at the end of day if you look at simple you just
Include investment to this because like I said it's uncorrelated and diversifying if you want to know about the theory of adaptive markets and all that then
You have that chapter
So far we have pretty quite good feedback on it. It's
It's not a how-to guide well one thing. I'll tell the audience you know they read that book
They're not gonna have some magic solution that they can start a trend following fund and and compete with us
It's not about that. It's about
understanding
Trend following and being a smarter investor
in trend following strategies understanding things like dispersion and benchmarking and
And what we talked about I one of the reasons we did this is just to bring
some academic rigor to
What's actually a fairly large industry? I mean turn for CTA sell a couple hundred billion dollars, and I've never had this kind of
Sort of like rigorous evaluation that will help institutions I
Think this will get more institutions. We just had a big consultant that put CTAs on the list of approved investments
and they hadn't done it for
100 years
You know one of the really really really big consultants who consults to really really big institutions
Because of this kind of academic work allows them now to be a smarter
Investor aha, they know how to benchmark aha
They know how to explain differences of performance so now they can put this in front of investment committees and
Answer questions about that before it was just a voodoo thing here's somebody's track record, okay, so what?
So you know little little by little this will get you know space shelf space and
It'll get into people's portfolios and intellectual shelf space because there's no more bookstores out there unfortunately so
If yes, I've seen them in Singapore though
They think the bookstores in Singapore were really really packed when I was there recently so it's a real bookstore. Yeah
Yeah, yeah, I they're packed. I mean all the all the current
Best-selling titles in America, so I I don't know if it's gonna go by the way help me help me get this book on
that list
Well, you know I think it's
Don't know about Singapore bookstores
I did have a book that appeared on their
Best-sellers list a few years back, but I'll see if I can dig up some info for you that can perhaps help
Wylie for one thing we'll just get on Wylie and say hey guys we want this baby because they love that kind of detail
I mean, it's the only place in the world where a taxi driver has ever recognized me and let's face
And I'm not exactly writing about you know topics that are you know?
James Altucher or or famous more famous people
I mean a taxi driver recognizing a guy that writes a book about trend following come on
So yeah, I'd get on Wylie about getting in those Singapore bookshops, okay
That's my bitch
Okay, Alex people can go to I Sam calm
And I think there are some papers that the that everybody can take a peek at if they go to the site
I think so yeah, or you know find me through Columbia. We do as a business
You know a high degree of education. This is how the book actually came about we had been writing white papers for
For a while we have white paper coming out actually this week on an interesting topic. You know maybe it'll be the first chapter of the
Next book so continuing the education
There's a big thing right now. Just to ask myself and answer a question quickly. There's a lot of mutual funds
Forming sort of liquid alternatives a lot of so-called cheaper versions of trend following being offered
You know I want to educate people on you know
What what you get for what you pay for and be careful about those things, but you will have now
You know now you have mutual funds that you can buy that to trend following so the access points will be
Will be easier for people. They just need to be able to attend you know evaluate
What they're getting, but it's it's going to become the train is out of the station. It will become
More mainstream. Let's leave it there Alex great conversation
I appreciate you coming on today, and like I said everybody can go to Amazon
Trend following with managed futures
Alex Gracerman
Catherine Kaminsky easy to find easy to buy
Hopefully we can talk again in the future ox. I'm gonna have to get Larry on for a really long conversation, too
Alex it was great talking and hopefully we can talk again in the future. Thanks Mike. Thank you


# Chapter 62

So listen, let me break this apart with you.
You've got this interesting paper
that I've come to be aware of
called Evaluating Trading Strategies.
And I wanna kind of unpack how that started.
And before we get into the trading aspect of that,
I wonder if you could use the example
that goes into football first
and just kind of like let the audience
slowly come into this thinking.
Right, so there are plenty of sports examples here too.
And maybe football is one of them.
Where like a team could have many wins in a row
or a quarterback, many passes in a row.
And the issue is, is that due to skill
or is it luck or is it a combination?
It's also the case that the quarterback
could appear to do quite poorly
in not making that many passes.
That doesn't necessarily mean
that the quarterback lacks skill.
It could just be bad luck.
Again, if you're evaluating in real time
whether the pole, the athlete or not,
this needs to be taken into account.
It is the same thing with investment managers
where you can outperform the market
many, many years in a row.
It's not clear that that's a result of skill
or a result of just good luck.
And it is a vexing problem in finance.
How do we separate the skill from the luck?
Before we get into your paper
and the example that you have in particular
about a particular trading firm, their strategy,
I was just thinking as you were talking
about beating the market for many years in a row.
I'm quite fond of him.
He's like some of my work.
I've had a chance to meet him several times.
He had a fantastic run at Legg Mason
and that's Bill Miller.
I think he beat the S&P for 14 years in a row, I believe.
But then at the end of the 14 year stretch,
there was a pretty significant drawdown in the OA crisis.
So I think as you make this point about skill versus luck,
there's no doubt it's not an easy subject, is it?
No, and look, it can be a combination.
That's the thing.
It's really interesting if you group
the best performing hedge funds or mutual funds
and then hold those for the next period
and just keep on doing that.
So you just buy the winners, like the extreme winners.
You just have that as a strategy.
Then what you find is that that portfolio does poorly.
Some of this is just luck,
that the people at the very top
probably were blessed with good luck.
That doesn't mean that they're unskilled.
They could still be skilled,
but they were skilled plus the luck that got them up there.
And this is the way that I usually like to explain this.
And suppose that you just grab a whole bunch of dice,
like a large number, let's say 36 dice,
and you drop them on the table.
And then you go pick out all of the ones that show six.
And let's say there's about seven of them
and take all the other dice away off the table.
Then you drop the ones that all have six.
And you're gonna get a combination of one, two, three.
It's gonna average about three.
And think of that as the people that did really well.
The sixes are the people that were at the very top
that did the best.
And then when you throw those dice again,
it's just natural that you're not gonna get
seven sixes from those dice.
So a lot of this has to do with regression to the mean
and luck.
You know, I was thinking of two very famed investors,
traders, one very famous, one not so famous,
but just as successful.
Jim Simons at Renaissance Technologies,
I mean, he's had math formulas named after him.
He will come out loudly and clearly always say,
hey, I'm a very lucky guy.
That's not, as you just say,
that's not taking away from his skill.
And I can think of the most famous USA investor,
the wealthiest USA investor.
He also says, he starts from, he says,
look, I won the ovarian lottery.
I mean, that's Warren Buffett.
So there's clearly a piece of luck at play.
And I think as we start to talk about,
start to move into your paper,
the notion of survivorship bias
really starts to become an interesting topic
because, you know, if we are to look at
particular trading strategies or particular traders,
I always say to myself,
and not in any way to take anything away from Warren Buffett,
but there's not a lot of other Warren Buffets.
That's true.
And I think that Jim Simons, Warren Buffett are probably,
they're up there, they are up there and they are saying,
well, I was lucky.
I really, that's a hard one to believe.
I know Jim Simons, I don't know Warren Buffett.
They do very different things.
From what I know of Simons operations,
there's a lot of skill there.
But as you say, again, it can be a combination
of having skill and good luck.
Well, you gotta have a strategy.
You gotta have a strategy that's predicated,
I'm thinking maybe for both of them perhaps,
you have a strategy that puts you in a position to benefit,
which I think is a skill to think this through,
puts you in a position to benefit
when the unexpected happens.
If one has a strategy that can operate like that,
that starts to be skill-like.
Yes, no, definitely.
And again, it might not always work.
Sure, process versus outcome.
You can have a great process
and it doesn't necessarily mean
that outcomes could be beautiful every time, right?
That is correct.
And you mentioned survivorship bias,
that the people, the winners are the ones that survive.
There is a kind of reverse type of bias.
And that is that some very skilled investment managers
drop out because they've had bad luck.
That's kind of a reverse survivorship bias.
But this is pretty important that this idea
doesn't just apply to investment managers.
Just let me discuss just for a minute
another research paper I have
that does a psychometric survey of CEOs.
What my paper finds is that CEOs are hugely,
more tolerant of risk than the lay population.
Like by a factor of 10, it's extraordinary.
And you can think of a scenario
where these people that are very tolerant of risk
enter a firm as a junior employee.
They take a lot of risk.
And some of them, they get lucky, it turns out.
It turns out others, they don't get lucky
and they drop out of the firm.
And then these people that are taking a lot of risk
with enough luck will rise to the top and be the CEO.
Whereas the person that's risk averse
never takes that extra bit of risk,
never experiences the good luck
and is stuck in the middle of the firm.
So this explains why the CEOs
happen to be very tolerant of risk.
The interplay of that plus luck,
I think goes a long way to explain
kind of the kind of psychometric qualities of CEOs.
You know, I can think of two very famed investors,
heads of investment banks,
who I think until the fall of 2008
were just for the vast population out there
that understood what they did.
They were viewed as Prince Charming.
Nothing could go wrong.
It'd be Ace Greenberg at Bear Stearns
and Dick Follett, Lehman Brothers.
I mean, these were guys that I think would fit
right into the outline that you were describing.
But then on the backside of an entire career
of taking more risk, waking up one day
and the dice come up different, huh?
Exactly, and of course, risk is two-sided.
So there's an upside and a downside,
and this was obviously negative realization.
It's really hard because they were on a roll, so to speak.
This could be bad luck or it could be lack of skill.
You know, as we were talking
about the survivorship bias issue,
and we're gonna probably talk about that
multiple times today, but I was thinking,
you mentioned, you said,
well, it could have been very successful investors,
and then they drop out after a long,
the two I just mentioned, a long string of success,
and then boom, they drop out,
because I sometimes think, though,
that as another side of that coin,
I often see that we'll talk about successful investors,
and then we'll say, well, survivorship bias,
they're the lucky ones left.
What about all the other guys that failed?
Or the implication being that everyone that failed
was as skilled and had the same technique
or same strategy as those winners,
which I think sometimes that's not,
I don't necessarily see that evidence all the time.
I think sometimes we just assume they were equal,
but they're not necessarily equal
or taking the same steps or strategies.
Just another facet of this, right?
Yeah, totally agree.
That could be a much different strategy.
But like in the end, that's what they choose.
So you could think of every investor
having a slightly different strategy.
Some of them might be chasing real risk premia.
Some of them think that they're chasing real risk premia,
but it turns out that it's not.
Others are chasing mispricing in the market
that might be fleeting.
And indeed, it might turn the other way,
that once you start buying, all of a sudden,
instead of something being undervalued,
it's overvalued.
So there's just a myriad of different strategies out there.
And some of them will turn out
because they should turn out,
like capturing a long-term risk premia.
And some of them will turn out just by luck.
You're just excited in terms of your research.
Was it random?
That's correct.
So I think that we don't do a very good job
at basically questioning the performance
and basically saying, was this due to luck
or was it due to skill on both sides?
So this is very important.
So we look at these investment manager stars
and think that they've got a huge amount of skill
and we don't consider the other side.
How much of that is luck?
As I said, goes both ways.
Where, and you know how often this happens,
where you hire an investment manager,
you look at the track record.
It's a wonderful track record.
You're comfortable with the track record.
You invest with the manager
and then they have like one or two years
of subpar performance and then you fire them.
And as soon as you fire them, the next year, they do great.
Well, what's the story there?
Well, it's a simple story of,
just like I mentioned with the dice,
you have a couple of years of bad luck.
Indeed, in the track record,
there's probably a couple of years like that too.
But you tend to ignore that.
You fire the person at exactly the wrong time
and you pay the price.
So investors just don't do a very good job
of attempting to weigh the balance of luck and skill.
Okay, before we get into your paper,
I want you to put your professor hat on for a moment.
And I think one of the reasons
that perhaps so many people get confused
is that our thinking,
we want to think in terms of this nice normal distribution.
Cause it works great for weights and heights
and all this kind of stuff.
And it's just fantastic.
Everything's just normally distributed.
But in the real world of asset management
and trading and investing,
there's something called skew.
Why do I let you run with it here for a few minutes?
As you're opening up to the class for the first time
to try and unpack a little bit of this
wrong thinking about the normal distribution
and what skew is exactly.
Sure, and this is an important component of my own research.
There's a path breaking paper published in 1952
by Harry Markowitz on how to kind of optimize a portfolio.
That paper led to a Nobel prize for him in 1990.
And basically what this paper does is it says,
well, what we want is a portfolio
with the best possible target of return,
but the lowest volatility for that level of target return.
Essentially, this is the optimal trade off
of expected return and risk.
And I'd like to put risk in quotations
because in this path breaking paper,
there was a footnote that's buried at the end of the paper.
It basically says, this only is appropriate
if the asset returns are normal
and investors have no preference for skew.
So let me explain what that actually means.
If the asset returns are so-called normally distributed,
then there's no unusual tail behavior.
That means that there's no severe downside.
There's no severe upside.
The upside and the downside are exactly symmetric.
The usual measure of volatility,
that's exactly what happens that, for example,
you could have a stock that is going up dramatically.
Maybe it goes up like 300, 400%,
and it's got a high level of volatility.
And you can have another stock that goes down dramatically.
Maybe it goes down 95%.
And it's got the exact same level of volatility.
Volatility doesn't tell you anything about the direction.
It's measuring the surprises in an absolute sense.
So volatility is symmetric.
It treats the upside and the downside the same.
Skew, on the other hand,
tells us the balance between the upside and the downside.
So you could have two portfolios
that have the same target return,
that have the same volatility,
but they've got a different skew.
So one has got an abnormally high probability
of a severe downside.
The other has got an abnormally high probability
of severe upside.
So for any investor, it's obvious which one to choose.
You choose the one that has got more upside than downside.
I've been on a campaign for many years
to try to change the way that we think of risk,
change the way that we actually do asset management
or portfolio management,
to take this asymmetry between the upside and the downside,
to recognize that it is rare
that any asset return is so-called normally distributed
and actually make that part
of the portfolio management exercise
and equally as important,
make it part of the risk management exercise.
I am tired about hearing
about these 20 standard deviation events,
like what happened to the Swiss franc,
or, and there's many other,
during the financial crisis, the brushing crisis,
all this stuff, 20 standard deviation events,
it's not 20 standard deviation.
So only 20, if you believe naively
that these asset returns are normally distributed.
They're not.
So don't even tell me this.
It doesn't make any sense.
I've had Harry on my show.
I had a chance to meet him before.
He's a really neat guy.
He's still sharp as a tack.
I think he would make the argument,
and I think he has,
that like, okay, I did my paper
and this was, I don't wanna use the word exercise,
but that's what's coming to my mind right now.
I think he was surprised
at how the industry took his work,
and he really wasn't a part of what happened,
but they kind of took his work and ran for it,
ran with it, and that was essentially
how modern finance got built off the back of his work,
isn't it?
That's a fair brief synopsis, isn't it?
Yeah, no, I was at a conference with him three weeks ago.
It is, that 1952 paper is an amazing paper.
I've only mentioned one thing that he foresaw.
There's another important one also.
Yeah, I think that this was like a simple framework
that he proposed.
It works under special assumptions.
He was the one that recognized
what those assumptions were,
but then you're right,
the industry just goes with something.
It doesn't think about like,
when is it appropriate to apply,
and when isn't it?
When I teach finance at Duke University,
it's one of the main lessons for my students,
is, okay, we've got these models.
All these models are wrong.
That's where they're called a model.
You're simplifying reality.
And the issue of applying your skill
is knowing when to apply a simplified framework
and when not to.
In certain situations, it's fine.
Other situations, no.
I think that Harry is really the father of modern finance,
and that paper is just an incredible piece of work,
given that he saw not just the usefulness
of his simplified framework,
but he saw basically how to take it to the next level
and to incorporate this idea of skew.
Let's jump into, as I mentioned
in the beginning of this episode,
your paper evaluating trading strategies.
And it did catch my eye for one thing in particular,
which is your early example.
And I want you to explain how you selected this.
And I wanna make sure that,
I mean, I assume that I knew the advisor
that you were talking about,
which was AHL,
which is a managed futures trading operation
owned by Mann out of London.
That was the example, right?
Yeah, so let me describe the example.
And it's from a seminar at Mann AHL.
As you say, it's Mannish Futures,
a house that manages about $15 billion.
So at AHL, they look at strategies all the time.
They think very deeply about this luck versus skill.
This is a strategy that basically they showed
a cumulative profit from 2004 through 2014.
It's a graph and it's basically going straight up.
It's extraordinary strategy where it's got one year
that has a very small negative return in 2004.
It knocks the ball out of the park
during the financial crisis.
It's got about a 15% annualized return,
15% volatility.
So a so-called sharp ratio of one,
extremely consistent.
We're looking at this strategy
and you can see people's head nodding.
Yes, this is the sort of thing
we wanna put some capital on.
And then the very next slide is really surprising.
It adds to this graph,
the other 199 purely random strategies.
So all of a sudden this graph
that was just one line going straight up
is added 199 things
that basically are centered around zero.
The exercise was to simulate 200 random strategies
with a target return of zero.
So every single one has no skill,
is purely generated numbers and a 15% volatility.
And you see the very top one,
the very best one is the one that was shown first.
And then you see at the bottom,
there's like a terrible one that earns 15% negative
and everything in between.
And the idea is that just by pure random chance,
and that's what the random number generator is doing,
by random chance,
you're gonna see strategies that look great.
You need to be very careful in a company
if you're doing internal research.
What you don't want is your researchers
sifting through hundreds of strategies
and just picking off the top one.
Because when you put money on that top one in real time,
it's gonna do poorly.
This was AHL presenting this information
you were at an event?
Yeah, because again, they're leading edge
in terms of thinking about luck versus skill.
And this was part of an exercise
on how to avoid overfitting of back tests.
So that's why that exhibit is there
because it is a great example
that you could easily be fooled,
easily be fooled by random strategies.
What is your perspective
just as a kind of little interjection here?
What is your perspective, your thoughts
about the work of Nissim Taleb, the Black Swan thinking?
Oh, well, it fits in really well
with my work on skewness.
He talks about so-called Black Swan events.
And again, these events that are like
negative 20 standard deviation events,
it doesn't make any sense
unless it's a normal distribution.
Because within the normal distribution,
the probability of something like that happening
is like one event in the life of the universe,
which doesn't make any sense.
So he's talking about these things
that are basically not,
you don't necessarily see them in historical data,
but then they happen.
A so-called negative,
you could think of it as an extreme
negative skew type of event.
So that works in pretty well
because his view of the world,
as my view of the world,
is that it's not symmetrically distributed,
it's not normally distributed.
So I think that that's important.
Coming back to the point
you were making a second ago,
though I think when you have researchers,
you have someone who a massive,
I use a third party example,
a trade station software,
and people start inventing strategies.
Most of the top traders that I've talked to,
and I was looking at AHL,
I've had a chance to talk to the H and the L in AHL.
But I was thinking that you really need to have
an economic thought process
as to why this particular strategy might work.
So for example, if we were talking managed futures,
we've been talking SKU,
many of the managed futures trading strategies,
obviously are a trend following in nature.
And they're predicated on
not really knowing what's gonna happen next.
A lot of their risk premia comes from hedging.
I mean, other hedgers out there,
I mean, people can make arguments
about where their source of profits come from.
But I mean, there's a thinking,
a longstanding thinking that goes behind
this particular strategy.
And I think you're making the point that,
hey, if you just sit down at your computer
and you really have not even philosophically thought
through what the strategy is,
and then you only wanna trust some random systems
that come up and there's really not a thought process
behind those systems, you can wake up in some trouble.
Even if initially all your investors are sold
on the idea of 15% returns and 15% volatility,
and that sounds great and you raise a billion dollars,
but if there's not a sound economic thinking
behind what the strategy is,
we all know what's gonna happen.
That's correct.
So this is the way that it should work.
And I do know from direct experience,
this is the way that it does work at a firm
like Man AHL,
and maybe it's no surprise that they've done so well
with this.
So basically a researcher would come up with an idea,
but without looking at the data.
So they come up with an economic framework,
and then they actually pitch that framework in a seminar.
I'll call it that, it's like an academic seminar.
They will get feedback,
and then the senior people will actually decide
whether the economic idea makes enough sense
that they actually go to the data.
Let's say it does make sense,
then the firm will give the researcher
what's known as a random partition
of the history of the data.
So they will give bits and pieces of the history
to the researcher.
The researcher will then test the economic idea,
and this is the so-called end sample testing,
and then there'll be another seminar.
The results will be presented of this exercise,
and then the decision will be made
whether to give the rest of the data
to test it in the so-called out-of-sample.
So it might be killed,
or it might go ahead to the out-of-sample.
So let's say it actually goes to the out-of-sample,
and let's say it does well,
then there's a further stage
where it will be invested in,
but only invested with internal money.
So it's multiple stages
that you actually have to go through
until that gets declined,
because you really don't wanna put anything
to client trading that might be a result of luck,
because you don't wanna disappoint your clients.
All the incentives are running the right direction
to do the best possible thing for your client.
I wanna go into a couple other issues as we wind down.
I was giving a presentation in Singapore this spring,
and I was speaking about
the managed futures trading strategy of trend following,
and at the end of the presentation,
this young lady raised her hand,
and she just had this look that said
she probably had been at Duke in one of your classes,
and really, really was bright.
She just had that look that said,
oh man, I'm in trouble,
she's gonna kill me, she's gonna obliterate me, I'm dead.
And she raises her hand,
and she immediately shot herself in the foot,
and I want you to kind of explain why,
but she immediately was like,
okay, can you tell me about the sharp ratio
of these strategies?
And I could just, I wanted to do a Vulcan mind meld
and just say, hold on,
let's don't just immediately assume
the sharp ratio is the be all end all.
Let's at least pick apart
the pros and cons of the sharp ratio.
But you could just see the indoctrination
as she asked the question.
Yeah, incredibly naive,
but this is the way it is in industry.
And like on both sides, buy side, sell side,
that people will look at an investment,
look at the sharp ratio,
which is the expected excess return
usually over some benchmark divided by the volatility.
So they are only considering the volatility risk.
And let me tell you the type of trouble
they get you into.
If you do like the sharp ratios
of different investment styles,
or maybe even like hedge fund returns,
you'll see a wide variation in the average sharp ratios.
You'll see a gigantic sharp ratios
for things like convertible arbitrage,
but more modest sharp ratios
for things like managed futures.
And the reason is very clear
once you expand the way you think about risk.
Managed futures has got positive skew.
And it's almost by construction,
because when things are going up, you're buying.
That's the same as replicating a long call option.
When things are going down, you're selling.
That's like replicating a long put option.
So effectively, you can think of managed futures
as something with a long straddle, like performance,
which has got positive skew.
So they do really well in market meltdowns
and they do well when the market's going up sharply.
So that is something that is rewarded by investors.
They actually like that, it provides a hedge.
Whereas these other sharp ratio,
very high sharp ratio strategies,
they can have severe negative skew.
So for them, you need to have some extra return on average
because investors really don't like that severe downside.
So you cannot compare two strategies
based upon a sharp ratio
if they have different skew properties.
The sharp ratio does not take that into account.
Indeed, it's very similar
to what we were talking about earlier
with the simple Markowitz framework
where you look at expected target return
divided by volatility.
Volatility is not a sufficient metric for risk.
It is part of the story, it's not the entire story.
If you make the mistake of just looking at volatility,
then it's going to lead to a portfolio
that will disappoint you.
You know, I was thinking back to that example
I just mentioned with the young lady
and the moment I started to try to unpack
the conversation, the sharp ratio
and talking about upside volatility,
the blinders went on.
It was just like, don't say anything else.
I didn't know if it was, I didn't want to listen
or I don't understand or I've already got my mind made up.
It was just, the indoctrination just strikes me.
Well, it's complicated
because this sort of discussion
is not even in the textbooks, in finance.
It's kind of surprising.
So you can go through a top program.
That is a truest, truest statement.
Anyone listening right now that doubts you,
I want them to go find where you're wrong.
Yeah, it's one of the reasons I don't use the textbook
for what I teach.
I teach out of my own notes and my own research articles
but this is something that,
you have to point a lot of fingers here
including pointing fingers at my own colleagues.
So I just don't think that we do a good job
of explaining risk to our students.
I think in my classes, about three classes
we just sit down and just think about
what risk actually is.
You're making an absolutely fantastic point there.
I'm thinking this as we're talking.
It's like, it's the put aside all the jargon
and to get people to conceptually wrap their arms
around the idea of what skew is
and even getting rid of the word skew, so to speak
and getting people to sit down and look at it all
and really just, I think a freshman in high school
with no math training, if properly explained
what's going on, could understand this.
Yeah, no, I agree.
Let me give the other insights in Markowitz's article
that is relevant for this discussion.
And that is that his framework assumes
that you exactly know all of the inputs.
You exactly know the volatilities.
You exactly know correlations between assets
and you exactly know the target return, exactly.
There's no uncertainty in any of the inputs
whereas in the practice of management, there is uncertainty.
So another dimension of risk is that you think
the correlation is, let's say 0.5, but you're not sure.
Maybe it's 0.2, maybe it's 0.7,
but it's certainly not exactly 0.5.
The same for the volatility.
You think it's 15, but you're uncertain.
Maybe it's 12, maybe it's 17.
This is another dimension of risk.
So most people think, well, risk is just the volatility.
Well, another way of thinking about risk is, well,
what if you don't know what the volatility is?
Well, even deeper, what if you don't know
the distribution, so it's not normal.
We kind of know that, but what is it?
Or the skew, we don't know what that downside tail
actually is.
We can maybe estimate it, but we're not sure.
All of this is risk and it's rarely taken into account
at this level, that there's a difference
between risk and uncertainty.
People usually group those together
and it shows that they really haven't thought it through.
I think one last point to kind of end on
as we talk about the notion of estimates
and so many of the decision makers out there
that are in charge of institutional money
or making allocations, I mean, it'd be a long story
to get to the point as to why many of them
have a faulty foundation.
But the fact that so many decision makers
that are in charge of other people's money
think that somehow or another
there is a perfect prediction for tomorrow
and that estimates are a bad thing
and estimates are basically all we got.
It's really crazy as you know what,
that we've got to a position where there's so many people
that think the world of investment management
is supposed to be perfection.
It's just an insane notion
that we've got ourselves to this day and age.
And unfortunately, the actual investors kind of reinforce
this because they will judge the manager
based upon the past quarter or the past year.
And that leads to a different type of behavior
on the part of the manager.
I would much prefer, as I said earlier,
take a look at the track record,
you're comfortable with it, fine.
And what I actually recommend that investors do
and the investment managers is to educate the client
as to what could happen.
So one way of doing that, it's really simple.
Let's say I've got a 20 year track record.
What I can do is to create with the real data
from those 20 years, an alternative history
by kind of randomly sampling years and put them together
and then just keep on doing that.
Then it gives you a way to look at what things
could look like given the track record.
So then when it actually happens,
maybe you've got two years in a row
of substandard performance,
you can look at the history and say,
well, gee, that's not unusual.
That happens 25% of the time given the track record.
So if you believe the actual track record
and you actually analyze it in this way
of creating alternative histories,
then it really helps you avoid the mistake
of firing a skilled manager
basically because they've had some bad luck.
If I see 1% a month, every month, every year,
I'm either thinking it's Bernie Madoff Jr.
or another long-term capital management.
You just can't make money every month.
I mean, maybe there's somebody with a higher frequency shop
that's got some insane advantage that none of us else,
that no one else has, but it just doesn't work that way.
Yeah, this is a great example of,
actually one of my exam questions was almost exactly this.
So you've got somebody that is basically
an S&P 500 portfolio, but on top of the S&P 500,
they're writing out-of-the-money put options
and out-of-the-money call options.
If there's not that much volatility,
you're collecting a premium.
Month after month, given that premium that you're collecting,
they beat the market.
You're 1% here, 2%, 1%, 2%, it just keeps on going.
It's a legitimate strategy.
It is foolish to think that that is beating the market
or alpha or whatever you wanna call it.
That's called taking risk
because if the market goes severely down,
then you've got these put options you have to pay off.
It magnifies the downside of holding the S&P 500.
And on top of that, it cuts off the upside
because if the market goes up substantially,
you need to pay out for the call options.
So all that does is to take a portfolio of the S&P 500
and tilt it towards negative skew.
And that's the reason that you see a return pattern like this
that people are getting a little extra return
because at some point, there's gonna be a severe downside.
I think that that is important to take into account.
It's cliche, but that free lunch thing
really isn't so free, so.
Hey, Campbell, listen, I appreciate you coming on today
and I hope you enjoyed the time.
I really think people are gonna like this episode.
You are a pros pro in terms of interviewee,
so I appreciate you coming on.
Where can we send people to check you out,
more of your work, where's the best place for them to go?
I know you got a Wikipedia page up,
which probably leads to everything,
but fire out the URL.
You could go at Cam Harvey on Twitter.
That would, and my blog is called
Garden of Econ altogether.
I have to come on again.
I'm gonna have to start checking out your papers.
It's a difficult subject, but to break this down,
and maybe I'm too far in the clouds too these days,
I don't know, but to break it down
and try and get these subjects unfiltered
and to make sense is a challenge.


# Chapter 63

Efficiently inefficient the title of your new work in the last few months I think obviously you're you're breaking some if you say it's a new grounds but i obviously we've all seen in the last year two years where the nobel prize was split between fama and shiller i'm guessing.
That there was a certain inspiration for your title from that if not tell me the inspiration.
Yeah, that's right so there's been this long academic debate about where the markets are efficient and gene farmer he stands for this view that markets are fully efficient and prices reflect the fundamental value of securities versus prices are inefficient and and shiller you sort of represent the opposite point of view that market prices are irrational.
They're driven by investor irrationality and investors push prices far away from their fundamental values I have a great respect for both fama and shiller I know them both well but I wanted to sort of take a different point of view one that that is somewhere in between but but also tries to be well defined saying that market prices are neither fully efficient nor completely inefficient but they are inefficient enough.
That smart asset managers and active investors have a chance to beat the market and be compensated for all the costs they have associated with with actually becoming informed about asset prices and trading the same time.
The market prices are efficient enough that the marginal investor is sort of indifferent about pursuing this active investing with the benefits being better performance but the cost being transactions cost asset management fees and the cost associated with finding a good asset manager so there's just that equilibrium in which markets are just the right place in the between they're just efficiently inefficient.
For the audience so they know a little bit about this your new work officially inefficient you do profile and you you have a kind of a q&a session with some very prominent names I want to quickly rattle those off from Lee Ainsley Jim channels cliff Astinist George Soros David Harding Myron Scholz Ken Griffith John Paulson.
Obviously some of the biggest names out there and all very different styles and we don't we don't have enough time today to break apart all those different styles I'm gonna kind of pick a few with the distinction that you're drawing that you just described how did these great traders these great managers with such different styles and I'm thinking in particular in this work in a George Soros and David Harding are pretty dogmatic about hey you know the efficient market hypothesis is fill in the blank bad word some curious when you
would explain your perspective how did the managers and traders feel about your perspective yeah that's a great question so definitely you're right that many of these managers they would certainly not feel that markets are fully efficient they you know they feel very strongly that their job is to beat the market and they succeed in that job not because they're just lucky but because markets are not efficient you're right David Harding spoke in particularly strongly against
efficient market hypothesis I think a lot of these guys at the same time though are sympathetic to this view that yes there is a scope to have edge but very efficient to exploit these marketing efficiencies that's sort of another interpretation of the title and I think they're actually quite sympathetic to this view they don't think that just anybody off the street can easily beat the market you have to be really efficient to to actually accomplish that.
Were you familiar with and had met with and spoken with many of these managers and traders off of course some of them clearly you know very well the full suite of them were you intimately familiar in terms of having conversations or where there's where it was a lot of these interviews brand new with these particular managers obviously you know their styles and what they do but I'm just curious about your connection with them.
Yeah you're right I certainly knew of all of them they're all extremely famous as you say I knew some of them well I knew Cliff Asness he's my colleague at AQR Capital Management so he was the one by far knew the best I knew myron Scholz quite well through my meeting him at academic conferences and in other connections I also knew John Paulson he endowed a chair at NYU and I was lucky enough to actually hold that John Paulson
chair I was a John Paulson professor at NYU so I met him in that connection and I think several of the others I have never met and so it's really exciting and fun to meet these guys and get their perspective on how they invest and really try to get an opportunity to ask them exactly how they do it and what how do they get their action and what motivates them and what are the key drivers of their success.
Was there a common theme developing and how they thought regardless of style and technique just a very big picture question before we dive in you know obviously they're all very smart they're all extremely driven and ambitious I think they all discipline and clear thinkers in terms of their investment styles and methods they're very different but I think there are some common themes even though.
You know they use very different words I think a lot of them are using a trade strategies related to value investing and momentum trading so clear fastness horse has actually written academic papers and was one of the discoveries of momentum trading in stocks together with a few other academics and so he talks a lot about value momentum but you know guy like George Soros he will talk in very different terms he will talk about.
Trading on boom bus cycles for instance but when he says he's riding the boom in some sense he's being a momentum trader and when he positions himself for the bus at that point he effectively becomes a value investor.
When you think about Lee Ainslie who's a famous tiger cup it's done very well trading stocks globally you know obviously value investing and thinking about the quality of those companies is a key driver as it you know value is also.
You know key driver for a short sale like James chain us who basically thinks about you know which companies are all value which companies might be fraudulent or have some.
A little bit too creative accounting and so on he wants to short those and in shorting all value firms he's basically taking the short side of being a value investor you bring up a great point about terminology and jargon I can think to the classic phrase that source uses reflexivity I'm sure I mean that's.
It's a term that's been out there there's a certain philosophical bent to it I mean there's I mean he's written several books but I think one of the a great place where you can take apart some of the jargon and perhaps with your best professorial hat is the different types of momentum and a QR is is obviously known for for both types frankly and quite a bit of not only the trading but academic work.
Why don't you for the audience give people you know you mentioned cliff and the type of momentum that he discovered but time series momentum the type of momentum that might be more commonly called trend following can you compare and contrast those two types of momentum for the audience.
What's called momentum in stock trading often it's also called cross sectional momentum basically means looking at the different stocks out there and seeing which stocks have outperformed other stocks.
And then you will tend to go along the stocks have been outperforming while at the same time shorting stocks that have been under performing.
And then you're basically hoping that those outperforming stocks or the last let's say 6 to 12 month will continue to outperform over the next month.
So that is to be compared with what's called time series momentum which basically means looking typically at an index whether it's a stock index or currency or commodity and basically seeing if it's been going up in value has been trending up over the last year.
Let's say so so time series momentum is is related to looking at every security scene in isolation whereas cross sectional momentum is looking at relative outperformance and the differences friends and if let's say the whole stock market has been going down.
And cross sectional momentum investor, he might go long stocks that have been dropping less in value.
So it might be less suppose all the stocks in a given universe have been actually going down some of them have been going down less. So those are outperforming a cross sectional momentum investor would buy those.
And short those that the drop by more where is the time series momentum investor managed to just have invested huge is short all of them would say they're all trending down let me show all of them.
Going back to something you said as well to you mentioned the idea that some aspects of the technique of these very diverse traders and managers there's commonalities think one of the commonalities that I would love you to talk about is gamblers ruin risk for when.
Yeah, they're certainly all quite aware of of risk management and some of them actually was also told me about some of their losing trades.
I think a lot of them are obviously very happy about the winning trades, but they're also quite marked and I've learned a lot from their losing trades. It's really important that you learn from your losing trade, but also that you don't go bankrupt from your losing trade. Are there any losing trades in a particular trader manager that come to mind right off the top of your head?
Yes, so Lee Ainsley talks about one particular losing trade where he had like a great investment thesis.
His analysis was correct, but it turned out that the management that were supposed to deliver on those great promises for that particular company was not capable of doing it. And he really learned the importance of the management and has since really paid very close attention to the.
The management of companies to invest in, you know, also.
Janus talks about a short position he had that kept moving against him for a variety of reasons.
Fortunately for him, he has a position limit. So you as the as the short position moves against him, it gets bigger. And so this is one of the risks of short selling. When you're short selling, you lose when the stock price goes up.
When the stock price goes up, if you have a fixed number of shares, now you're actually short more dollars or, you know, a bigger value and the risk potentially increases. So therefore he has a position limit and he would actually reduce his position as the position moved against him.
And that helped him to limit the losses in that in that particular trade. Most people out there, if they're familiar with Julian Robertson and the Tiger Cubs story, generally a fundamental style of thinking and trading.
I thought was interesting was your questioning to Lee Ainslie about his quantitative aspects of his trading methodology, particularly portfolio construction.
Yeah, that's right. So he has a number of investment professionals who go out and meet with management and meet with different competitors and and try to really understand the industry where each company operates. But at the same time, he told me about the fact that they actually have a quantitative system.
To evaluate their positions, the risk exposures and to really help them make the portfolio construction as efficient as possible.
Looking at all these managers, looking at these traders, their track records, studying their performance.
Is there a strategy? I don't want to ask the silly question, is there a best strategy? There are different strategies for different reasons.
But is there a strategy, do you think, across these managers, these traders, that's perhaps more repeatable? There's only one George Soros. There's only one Paulson. What about survivorship bias? Do you see a particular style across this selection of traders that's more repeatable?
Well, I think what's common among these strategies is that they're not just this magic effort by this genius, but I think that we can actually understand the core of many of these strategies. There is an economic logic behind why they work, but at the same time, they require tremendous skill and dedication and hard work to execute them well.
I think in my book, I try for each of these styles and strategies, so I talk about equity strategies, macro strategies, arbitrage strategies. For each of these, I try to understand what is the basic economics behind why they work and how you could create a repeatable process that could deliver potentially outperformance.
It certainly has to be very difficult to do because otherwise, these things would be arbitrage away.
When you were putting this book together, were you looking for the particular styles or were you looking for the particular manager and trader?
I started with actually thinking about what are the various classic styles, and then for each of these eight styles that I identified, I sought to basically get the most prominent current investor who's still active.
I wrote down these eight names, and I thought, how am I going to get them to say yes?
I started with the people I knew the best, and then when those guys said yes, I had a connection to someone who knew George Soros.
Then Soros said yes, and then when I started asking, the next people started getting easier when you have polls and assness and the like.
Yeah, sure. There's a certain, to put that together, anyone that does something like that, as someone who's written a few books and does a podcast, there's a certain method to the madness, so to speak, to put together that roster.
Something that Cliff brings up that you have as a question, and you're talking about the difference between the real world and the academic world, I like his answer because we can look, we can go back at a performance track record, for example,
and you can look and say, well, there was a three-year flat period or there was a significant drawdown, but then you came out of it and everything was okay.
Cliff points out that in the real world, it's not so easy to just look at track records like that, is it?
That's right. He talks about when you're actually going through such a tough period, there's a time dilation, he calls it, where it seems like time is going much more slowly,
and it's really painful, actually, to have those losses. Even if you have greater gains coming out of it, it's really just an extremely tough period.
I think that's part of the reason these strategies work, in that it certainly is hard work to do it, but it's also really stressful and requires a lot of discipline to just continue to do the right thing.
When you're starting to face losses, there's a lot of temptation to panic or do various things that are not part of the original plan because you think those losses might just be too difficult to handle otherwise.
It's interesting, too. A lot of the traders and managers that you put in this book, that's one of the things they have to deal with is on a daily basis or a monthly basis, whatever.
Dealing with clients and making sure clients are on board with the strategy and understanding that there could be down periods, et cetera.
I'd like to bring something up that I talked about in advance with you, which is Warren Buffett.
A lot of people don't know that Warren Buffett has had multiple 50 percent drawdowns, so to speak.
I don't know the exact number, but there's something, too, that if you're going to produce the type of performance that he's produced over the years,
you do have to be willing to take and handle a significant down period.
But why don't you talk about Buffett and his alpha?
I think you really put together some significant insights where a lot of people say, well, hey, hold on.
If Buffett's just a value investor, why is he so much better than everyone else?
You've kind of broken down and taken apart why he is so much better.
Yeah, that's right. So we got the data on Buffett's performance.
We looked at both the performance in the sense of just the Berkshire Hathaway stock.
So as you know, Warren Buffett is running the firm Berkshire Hathaway.
And so one way to look at his performance is to just follow that stock price.
But you could also see the publicly traded stocks that he holds.
So Berkshire Hathaway has to make a filing to the SEC about the publicly traded stocks that they own.
So we can put together that portfolio and simulate that portfolio at the same time.
And the first thing we looked at is just how good is Warren Buffett?
How good do you need to be to become one of the richest people in the world?
And it turns out his Sharpe ratio is about just over 0.7, between 0.7 and 0.8,
which I think actually surprised a lot of people when we showed them this number,
a lot of people had assumed that he had a Sharpe ratio above 1 or even above 2,
as a lot of heads were bragging about numbers in that range.
It turns out he has had tremendously high returns,
but he has also had quite significant risks, leaving him with the Sharpe ratio,
which is still incredibly impressive because it's about double the Sharpe ratio of the market.
So for the risk he's taken, which has been substantial,
or the long haul being able to double the return relative to that of the market.
So it's really an astonishing format.
And our research does in any way try to diminish that incredible accomplishment.
But so when other researchers have looked at it, they have recognized he's a valid investor.
He talks about being a valid investor.
So you can also regress its return on the return to being a valid investor,
which is called a value factor.
And that factor explains some of his performance, but only a small part,
and it leaves a huge alpha.
That's sort of a big unexplained part.
What we then did is to say, well, let's also regress him on the return to being what we call a quality investor.
So what he buys is not just cheap stocks, but he also buys high quality stocks.
And he talks about that in his speeches and his writings,
that he really likes to buy high quality goods and high quality companies at a reasonable price.
When we actually regress him on both the standard factor, including the value factor,
as well as what we call quality minus junk,
and also a factor that captures more safe stocks called betting against beta,
then it turns out we can actually explain a large part of his performance
and basically get a strategy that looks very much like his performance
and has an ability to explain almost all his alpha.
What we interpret that to be is basically what he is doing, what he's saying he's doing.
Yes, he's a valid investor. He's a quality investor.
He likes to buy stable, profitable, high quality companies at a reasonable price.
And those types of stocks have done well in general.
The interesting finding is it's not just the quality firms that he has been buying
that have done well and have been good investment.
It's quality firms in general.
And so those types of stocks in general have performed well.
And he has benefited from being a very early investor to recognize that and exploit it.
And he's able to leverage it through his insurance company in a very clever and very smart way
and really performed extremely well as a result of those investment choices
and that leverage strategy.
Yeah, you mentioned leverage.
He definitely is using leverage to a degree that perhaps the novice investor might not understand.
But obviously he's doing it in a very smart way.
But he is not a trader devoid of leverage.
Yeah, that's right.
He speaks quite negatively about leverage often and certainly the risks of leverage.
So if you look at his portfolio and his performance, you can see that he uses leverage in two ways.
Number one is that you can simply look at his balance sheet and you can see that he has leverage.
He has a number of liability.
He's been issuing bonds, for instance, as one source of leverage.
And he has a lot of insurance-related liabilities.
And we estimate his leverage is about 1.6 to 1, meaning that for every dollar of equity capital,
you will then invest in 1.6 dollars of companies.
Another way to see that he's using leverage is, you remember I mentioned that we could simulate the performance of his portfolio of publicly traded stocks.
We can look at the volatility, the risk of that strategy.
And then we can look at the risk or the volatility of Berkshire Hathaway stock.
Turns out the volatility of Berkshire Hathaway stock is bigger than the volatility of his publicly traded stocks.
That certainly is consistent with the idea that Berkshire applies leverage to the portfolio.
So if you add leverage to a portfolio, then you will tend to increase the risk.
And so that sort of ranking of the risk is consistent with leverage.
It's just a tool, and he's using the tool wisely.
That's right.
I want to go into this notion of backtesting, but I first want to start with a quote from Cliff Asness.
Quote, I think that good quant investment managers can really be thought of as financial economists who've codified their beliefs into a repeatable process.
They are distinguished by diversification, sticking to their process with discipline and the ability to engineer portfolio characteristics.
For those traders out there today that call themselves more fundamentally driven or value, is there anybody that's not backtesting their world in 2015?
Yeah, I think there's a lot of discretionary traders that will look at a unique, special situation that you might have a very hard time backtesting there.
So if you're an event driven trader and there's a new type of event, perhaps you can't backtest that.
But perhaps you can still convince yourself that you're buying something at a discount to its fundamental value.
You're relying on the general principle that sort of buying things cheap has worked over the long term.
You might not be able to backtest in a more scientific way this type of strategy or if you're trading a new type of securities and so on.
So I think actually probably still the majority of investing is not in a discretionary manner.
Do you think, though, that guys like Harding, guys like Asness, with this mindset of testing and this quantitative mindset,
is it slowly making a dent in the consciousness where perhaps investors in the future are going to say, you know what, we want more than the discretionary ability.
We want to really understand from the scientific.
Are some of the guys winning over the headspace or is it still in the early stages, so to speak?
So I myself, as you know, is a quant investor.
I am a strong believer in using scientific methods to evaluate investment strategies.
But at the same time, I try to keep an open mind.
I don't want to say that one method is better than the other method.
I think you're right that the more scientific way of investing has basically made large inroads over the last 20 years.
But at the same time, I think there is a role for it.
I personally have a great respect for some of the more discretionary traders that when chain us, for instance, is finding funny things in the accounting numbers
in a way that can really get a computer to do right now or when other discretionary traders are doing things that cannot easily be codified on a computer
because it's more relying on more soft information or different, you know, case by case type of analysis.
I personally have a great respect for that also.
And so I'm not sure that that will gravitate to everybody investing in one way.
I think investing fundamentally will have many aspects and it's driven by people having different methods and different points of view.
And that's basically what creates a buyer and a seller that there are all these different ways of doing it.
Let's talk about the role of hedge funds in the economy.
The typical understanding, clearly not for those that know, but for the typical understanding, there's often negative press,
especially at chaotic moments and words like speculation will be thrown around in a really negative sort of way.
But there is a role for hedge funds in the economy and it's not just necessarily the investors themselves that invest in the particular fund.
I mean, some people might say, hey, why should I be concerned with assorted hedge funds?
I'm not invested in these.
Talk about, from a big picture standpoint, we could talk about this all day, the role of hedge funds in the economy.
Hedge fund can play a very positive role in the economy for a number of reasons.
I think, first of all, our free market economy basically allocates resources based on prices.
If somebody invents a drug that can cure particular disease, he may not have enough capital to pursue that cure,
but this is a very promising idea that others can understand.
He can then raise a lot of money through the capital markets and then build the factories to pursue that idea.
Whereas another vendor who has a perhaps not very useful idea, he might have a difficult time raising money,
and therefore the machines and the real capital factories are allocated to the more promising idea.
Now, that whole notion relies on market prices being relatively efficient.
The company with the more promising ideas, their stock price has to be higher.
Their market cap has to be higher in order for them to be able to really raise more capital and build more machines.
This is incredibly important for the market economy.
Hedge funds and other active investors are tending to buy low and sell high,
so they tend to push prices in the right direction, making markets more efficient.
Again, that's just incredibly important.
They help to provide liquidity, make it easier to buy and sell for investors, make it easier for people to save for retirement.
A lot of large pension funds are invested in these types of vehicles,
and hopefully hedge funds and other active investors contribute to their performance,
although of course they take large fees and they keep a lot of the benefits for their own sake too.
So I think it's certainly fair to say that investors should be very concerned about the fees
and to what extent they themselves enjoy the benefits of those investment strategies.
You asked a question to David Harding in the book, and you asked the question essentially,
does your research suggest that it's better to have the same type of model for every instrument,
or is it better to have a very specific model for each one?
Why don't you talk about his response and your feelings about the response, your experience as well?
Yeah, so I agree with his response that it's very important to have a very robust model
that works across a number of different securities.
It's often tempting to really tailor your strategy so it looks like it's the best for every asset.
You might want one particular managed future strategy for gold,
another strategy for wheat, yet another strategy in commodities and so on.
If you try to do something like that, you might get an extremely good performance in your back test,
in your simulation of what would have happened in the past because you're able to tailor this.
But you might be exploiting a lot of noise, a lot of randomness,
and you might actually end up with a model that works less well going forward in the future
when it really matters when you're actually trading for live ammunition
and when it's really important that your model works.
So to avoid that kind of data mining or overfitting of your model,
it's often better actually to have a simpler strategy.
One, how do you get confidence that your strategy has a chance to work going forward?
Well, if the same strategy has worked for gold, not just the last year,
but not just last 10 years, perhaps last 50 or 100 years,
and if the same strategy has worked across all the commodities,
and not just all the commodities, it's worked for a bunch of currencies,
if it's worked for equity, if it's worked also in fixed income markets,
then you start to get a lot of conviction that this strategy is not just randomness,
it's not just a coincidence of the path that will not repeat itself in the future.
Then you start to get some conviction that this type of trend following strategy
or managed future strategy has a chance to actually work in the future as well.
You are part of the AQR study, the Century of Evidence on Trend Following, yes?
That's right, yeah.
Was there anything in terms of going into that project?
I mean, you obviously had ideas about how things might unfold.
Were there any elements or insights going through that process,
doing that research, doing that study that surprised you?
Well, it was quite exciting project, actually,
because we had been doing a lot of research on what are the best trend following strategies,
and showing that some relatively simple trend following strategies
actually have performed extremely well over the last 20 to 30 years,
and they've worked on average, not every year or every day,
but on average for every instrument we looked at, which is sort of unusual.
You sort of think that it's going to work perhaps at the portfolio level,
but not necessarily for every instrument in the portfolio,
but we found this very consistent performance even at the instrument level.
So we were thinking, wow, this looks really robust,
but how can we get even more conviction?
How can we get another out-of-sample study?
Of course, one out-of-sample study is just waiting
and looking at the live performance going forward.
We didn't have the patience for that, so we said,
well, let's actually go ahead and collect historical data on prices
that were earlier than what we had looked at before.
So rather than looking at just over the last 20, 30 years,
let's say let's look at a full century of data.
We were a little bit worried, of course,
that what it seems like such a robust result maybe didn't work
within the 60 to 70 years prior.
But to our surprise, it actually had worked really extremely well also historically
and about as well as in the more recent sample.
You mentioned in your book about the arms race and high-frequency trading.
I think there's an arms race amongst trend-filing managers
to see how many centuries they can go back, right?
I think you guys inspired with your first paper,
I think several others have come right after, huh?
That's right, yeah.
One of the things in your conversation with George Soros,
he talks about that you should not risk a significant part of your capital.
Therefore, if you have a good run and you're making a lot of profit,
you can risk your profits more than you can risk your capital.
That's a very classic time series momentum trend-following type thinking,
a very quant thinking.
Did you talk to Soros about the implementation of his strategies?
Because he has this very philosophical view.
Did you talk to him about implementation at all?
Yeah, I think he has a different way of implementing it, not so quantitative.
But he's also very concerned about the downside risk versus upside risk.
So what he's really hoping to find is a strategy or a bet
that has a big upside potential and a limited downside potential
and then put on a lot of money into that bet like he did on the British pound.
And he talks about, you know,
he had the courage to really put such an enormous position on the British pound
because if the pound broke, he would make a lot of money.
But given that there was trading in a band,
there was almost no risk that it would make a large move going against him.
And that type of thinking actually, he told me,
inspired John Paulson in the way he sized his subprime bet.
So I asked actually John Paulson whether it was true that he got the idea
to size the bet he did the way he did from Soros.
And he confirmed that in that interview.
So that was sort of a fun back and forth.
Yeah, it's those kinds of guys.
I think everyone has to look with deep admiration
because many of the traders that you talk about in your book
would not have the latitude to take those kinds of bets.
Obviously, there's a certain discretionary element.
I can use some interesting sports metaphors
and some kind of randy language to describe it.
But let's just say it takes a certain amount of gusto
what those guys do in terms of their big bets, doesn't it?
It definitely does, yeah.
And so keep grinding at them when they've made a lot of money
to not just fold and be satisfied,
but really just keep the bet on until it's really delivered and it's full potential.
Is there anything else that you would like to tell the audience
about this work in particular?
Like I said, throughout this conversation,
people are just going to have to get it and read it.
It's dense.
There's a lot of different directions that you go.
Is there anything in particular that you want people to understand before they read it?
I think definitely I hope people will find it interesting.
If they would like this combination of interviews with what I view
as the eight of the best managers out there
combined with some of the economic thinking
that goes behind those strategies
and a more thorough analysis of how we would actually pursue those strategies
and how does it tell us about how markets work
and how efficient capital markets are?
Where's the best place that people can go to find out more about you and your firm?
Clearly the book is on Amazon right now.
Where can they go?
I have a personal website at lhpetterson.com
A-Q-R is obviously at A-Q-R.com.
Appreciate your time today, sir.
Thank you.


# Chapter 64

Well, Jack wanted us to talk on elements of successful trading.
So I tried to think of what is it that creates successful trading?
And I think Mark mentioned some of the things.
I know Market Wizards 1 is one of my top three favorite books of all time.
Because if nothing else, when you read that book,
you clearly figure out that there's as many different people as there are
in the book, many different ideas on how to trade as there are in the books,
different markets, different systems.
It can be any one thing.
And as Mark indicated, and I'm sure Beau would agree even,
there isn't one single holy grail out there that just does it for you.
So I tried to look at the common characteristics.
What is it that we have to do as traders to be successful every day of our lives?
It seems to break down for me into three areas.
And from least to most important, I would list them as follows.
The least important area is the one that most people spend time on.
And that's where do we buy, where do we sell.
Call it the strategy, if you want to put a name on it.
You have to know where you're going to buy, where you're going to sell, or
when you're going to buy, when you're going to sell.
If you don't have a clue as to how you're going to do that,
you're going to have a heck of a time going through life and
just having things hit you over time.
You're going to tend to increase your amount of erratic nature.
You're going to have good days and bad days, and
you're going to be all over the map, probably.
All of us have a strategy, probably, whether it's your cyclical, or
whether you're a fundamentalist, or whether you're breakouts, or
whatever you want to do.
It doesn't make any difference, I don't think.
I think the important thing is that you have something.
And I think, as Jack indicated, and I couldn't agree more,
it really helps a whole lot to have it suit you.
I mean, if you don't have a million dollars, don't design a
million-dollar trading system.
If you don't know anything about computers, don't go out and
buy a computer package and try to run it, either that, or
you better get on a program to learn computers.
In other words, try to develop the strategy that you're
going to use to fit you.
It makes it so much easier.
I think the next up on the importance list, and very
critical, and we heard a lot about it from John Hill's
presentations this morning, is money management.
If you don't have some way of saying, that's what Mark's
talking about, money management, you've got to be
able to deal with it.
So you're going to have losses.
If you don't have losses, you're not taking any risk,
probably, you're probably not going to make any reward.
Losses are part of the game.
How to deal with them is very, very critical.
If you ignore them, they will come to haunt you.
I like to limit all of our positions in futures, for
instance, to a set percent of equity.
I'm willing to risk that much.
I always know that if my equity is going down, I'm in
a drawdown.
I'm committing less and less.
As I'm running up, I'm automatically
compounding my profits.
It gives me a sensible way to not stick my neck out.
I can come back and play the game again tomorrow.
It also allows me to do one other thing.
I can come in every day, and I know that all my positions
are a certain percent of equity.
The day that Jack was referring to where the crude oil had
gone all over the map overnight, by the end of the
day, or as soon as we came in, our risk in the crude oil
positions was exactly the same as it was the day before.
It tends to help you, as a person, keep each day somewhat
like the previous day.
But if you ignore it, it comes to haunt you.
This is the problem, I think, with a lot of the
simulation software, a lot of the black boxes, the so-called
holy grail systems that are advertised, a lot of them will
deal with, say, one contract, will buy one contract,
sell one contract, and it adds up to this much profit
after the end of the next five years.
Problem with that is, in real life, as those profits
build up, you have a tendency to have to compound
those profits.
If you don't build that into what you're doing,
then doing your historical simulations and what you
intend to do in the future don't even match each other.
So you're gonna get different results.
That's kind of almost a pointless exercise.
Include your money management right in your simulations
and really think a lot about being able to come back
and play the game again.
I think that's very important.
The last one, and the most important of all,
and it's the one that probably people spend the least
time with, is looking in the mirror and
understanding yourself.
If you really look at trading, I think, and you alluded
to it in your comments on most traders, you'll find
that a lot of traders will match up very well
to whatever their personalities are.
You got a guy that's impatient.
It's amazing how he becomes a short-term trader.
Somebody that wants excitement.
Can't get to Las Vegas on the weekend?
Boy, markets will provide him all the excitement he wants.
There's also any personality trait that you have
that might be exploited by the market against you.
Markets have a wonderful way of doing that for you.
So be careful what you wish for because you might get it.
In knowing yourself, I think of three major things
that can really help your efforts
in becoming a better trader.
One is that self-confidence is extremely important
in trading.
If you have a lack of self-confidence about either
yourself or your trading systems or strategies,
it seems to me that the markets will tend
to exploit that in you.
You'll end up being nervous about a drawdown period
and you'll let go of what you're doing
and go on to some next best idea that is just one more
example of something that's about ready to fall apart.
You'll just wander around aimlessly frustrated
over the whole thing.
I think self-confidence goes a long way
to giving you that courage to stick it out
through some of the tougher periods.
I think awareness of yourself is very useful.
If you can either detach yourself or be aware
that you're getting excited about making too much money,
that can be a problem.
You get too excited or you get too emotionally
set one way, markets are going up and you're long
and you're just making a hand over fist.
It may cloud your judgment on being able to limit
your losses when it comes time to pull a plug on that.
You may stay a little too long.
You may give up the profit.
So being aware of what's going on inside your head
is a very interesting thing to think about
and the more you can be aware of what's going on
inside of you as a trader, the better off you'll probably be.
And then the last thing I'd mention is to think about
a state of mind that's something like balanced.
In every trade that you decide to do,
there's probably some good points
and some bad points to think about.
There's some reasons why it would go up
or go down for that matter.
The more you can kind of balance those out,
I think the better chance you have at being flexible
and not getting married to a trade
and finding something going against you, cut it loose,
it's not a big deal.
You can constantly be changing your mind about things
and keeps you flexible, keeps you with the ability
to survive.
The last thing I'd say about trading
and it kind of wraps it all up,
it's a saying that I kind of repeat to myself frequently.
So in the hopes of maybe that you would like
to repeat it to yourself, I think this could apply to,
I say that this applies to not only trading
but probably life and certainly to golf,
which I'm gonna have a fan of.
And that's to concentrate on the process
and let the results take care of themselves.
What that means is being a trader has a lot of little things
that we do every day as traders to be successful.
And some of them are very unglamorous.
The view of people have of traders
is probably different from what really trading is
if you really sat down and followed me around all day
or any of the rest of the panel.
So concentrating on doing these little things right,
that tends to help the results be just fine.
To reiterate, get a strategy, watch your risk and volatility
and make sure you come back and play the game again
and look in the mirror and understand yourself.
And with that, I wish you the best of luck
in your trades.
If you as a trader have a certain comfort level
or a certain strategy that you're using,
I don't care what's fundamental,
technical, systems trader, whatever,
and if there's only a certain amount, as Bill indicated,
that you can pull out of a market that year
and that means you're flat for the year,
then a good trader says,
well, that's what I pulled out of it and I'm flat.
I think if, on the other hand,
there's hundreds of percent to be had
and you make hundreds of percent,
it doesn't necessarily mean that you've done
a good job trading.
Profits and losses are not good trading, bad trading.
Good traders are concentrating on the process
and in whatever they're slant on it is,
and whether they're trading one market or many markets,
they are staying true to whatever they're doing.
And then as the market changes,
it allows them to pull more or less out of it,
to match their style.
I'd love both of what they're saying into money management,
which, as I indicated, is very important
and if you don't have something involving that,
whether it stops or whatever Jack's doing,
it's tough, you might walk in one day
and find out that you can't trade today
because you're out of money.
I guess I would agree with him,
but I'd qualify it in the following way.
I'd give you maybe the positive side
of what to do about it.
If you can match what you're going to do,
and don't say system but strategy instead,
because you could be a fundamentalist
or a systems trader or whatever,
whatever that is, if you can match it to you,
you're gonna have a much better chance of success.
Now, what are the odds of you going and buying
that fancy black box for $2,000 or whatever,
and having it match you?
I mean, for starters, you may not even know
what's inside of the thing.
First time it has a down week or down month,
you're gonna be nervous, it's gonna maybe,
what happens if it goes through,
as John Hill was showing us this morning,
some systems that are very successful over time,
they'd have two years straight of flat profits,
but that's normal, that's expected.
It wasn't broken, and in fact, over the time period,
it made a lot of money.
But if you're sitting there, you don't even understand that,
then you're not gonna have the psychological side
to stay with it.
You're kind of setting yourself up
for a lot of frustration potentially,
and if you spent the same amount of time and money
just sitting down saying, what do I wanna do myself?
What's my way of looking at things?
Then it's gonna fit you, and you're gonna do it,
and you're gonna be a lot more successful at it.
That's something else that occurred to me.
A lot of these systems have another,
and I'll add in the system writers of the world
and most of it, like the Metastox,
a lot of the software that develops systems.
You'll find a lot of them are dealing with one contract lots
or constant contract lots.
If you just do that, and you tend to ignore
the money management systems that we all talked about,
and they talked about this morning in the panel,
you're gonna tend to set yourself up
for having difficulties in actual trading.
You'll know where to buy, where to sell,
but you won't answer the question
of how much do I wanna buy, how much do I wanna sell?
These systems don't tend to get into a lot of that.
It's a big danger, and when the systems
start addressing those issues or when the trading software
start addressing more of those issues,
you may feel a little more comfortable with it.
I would agree with Jack, though.
I would have no intentions of selling our software,
I'm sure these guys have better things to do
than to sell that.
Are you trading for yourself or for others for yourself?
The answer to that, I think, might be to take a look
at yourself and decide where your pain levels are.
I've known people that shouldn't be trading,
and it's because they can't take a single 1% down.
I know other people whose pain levels are extremely high
and can go to 50% down.
If you can decide where you are going
to be uncomfortable with it and then at that point say,
I've had enough of this, I'm outta here,
that will be your level.
My own level is different from what I have to do
for my clients.
Since I'm trading client monies,
my perception is that most clients
have somewhere around a 20% pain level.
So I try like crazy to keep the drawdowns less than 20.
It's not to say you're always successful at doing that,
but that's a good target area to start shooting for.
I think most clients in the futures area nowadays,
especially the institutional guys,
and we have some people here that,
for instance, it's outselling institutions all the time.
Isn't it a fair statement, probably,
that 15 to 20% returns, if you can do them
with any regularity and keep the drawdowns minimal,
that'd be reasonably attractive.
It's nowhere near the hundreds.
In fact, the hundreds of percent,
I think they throw David out the door, maybe.
They'd be afraid.
They might anyway, right.
He's been throwing out quite a few doors.
That's the answer.
It's up to you.
Well, in my own case, as long as I'm,
as long as I'm, let's say I hit a drawdown limit
where I say it's gone too far now.
This is unreasonably large for some reason.
It's more than I would have expected.
That's a time to take a look at what's going on,
I guess, really dig in and see if I've learned anything
or there's something I've missed
or something I'd like to add or whatever.
As long as I'm in a drawdown
and it's an expected situation.
In other words, if I'm a long-term position trader
in the currencies, let's say the currencies
are going sideways and I'm getting whipsawed to death,
that's to be expected.
I don't, then it's not broken, don't fix it.
You know, it's what I would expect to be doing.
I would be, you look and tell me
what the markets are doing and you ask,
what do you expect you would be doing right now?
I'd be saying, I'd be losing money now.
Then it's not broken, so don't fix it.
So as long as it's normal, I think,
if I don't fiddle with it.


# Chapter 65

Tom welcome. Thanks for stopping in today. Well, thanks for having me Michael. I this is the first interview
I've done I think in about eight years since I retired
you know the great thing about the world of
Of trend trading is that I find that that experience doesn't there's no half-life
It doesn't it doesn't go away
Like there's a lot there's a lot of wisdom that we can all pick up from folks that have been down the the dusty trail
So to speak before I sometimes hear people tell me they're like, well, you know
Covelle, what are you gonna learn from these guys from from decades ago? And I'm like, are you serious?
Much changes Michael, it's the same thing and I was just looking
Today to just make sure I knew where everything was since I haven't been interviewed in so long
I just did a Google search on my name and trend stat my old firm's name and I was amazed to find
I gave up after 30 pages of results
It was amazing all the stuff that once it's on the web, it just stays there forever
So it's kind of a trip down memory lane. Yeah
Well, listen, let me let me jump in because I think a lot of people have gotten used to this and and they like this
They they want to know okay
I can pick up new market Wizards and I can read this this great
This great interview story that Jack Schwager put together with you and many moons ago
But I think people they really want to know know what was was Tom Basso like it 13 or 16
You know, what were you thinking about like where did this what were you doing early on it?
How did the migration happen the switch if you could maybe fill in some of that color?
I think it'd be great. Well, I was 12 years old and I was delivering papers the Syracuse Herald journaled on the evenings and
I had about 82
subscribers and making about ten dollars a week and I had a mutual fund salesman show up and
at my dad's house, I
Listened in and started buying mutual funds when I was 12 years old 12 12
Okay, that's that's it. That's a head start
Yeah, and by the time I got to college
Thanks to the loads, which I did not know anything about it that time
How much the salesman was taking out of the front end?
I had gotten back to break even on that position
sometime just after I went to college at about 18 years old and
That's just break even and I realized that the markets went up and down
And I started in junior year of college worrying about where I was gonna get a job as a chemical engineer
Which is what I graduated from Clarkson University up in Potsdam, New York. I
Had about 25 different job offers
So I thought one way to look at this might be to just sort of plot the stock of some of these companies
And take a look at what they did and it ended up I ended up going to work for Monsanto in st. Louis
And I plotted Monsanto stock and I ended up starting to trade Monsanto stock
because it went up and down and I realized that it'd be foolish to just buy and hold it because it seemed to
Pop up to 40 and go down to 20 and you know
I might as well you know make money each time it does that because it didn't seem to get much above 40
Those days back in the 70s
That kind of led me more to try and to quantify
How do I do this without having to think too much about it because I was a busy guy
I was getting an MBA. I was being a chemical engineer at that time
I was starting up with the original firm that that was the precursor of trend stat
Which was Kennedy capital, which still exists today in st. Louis a small cap manager. I
sold my sheriff's Kennedy capital and did trend stat, but
You know
it was an evolution getting into futures and using trend following techniques on futures and getting into currencies because I ran out of futures capacity and
One thing leads to another and pretty soon 28 years have gone by and I'm retiring
Okay, so I've had this problem before as guys like yourself. They make that whole story really fast about
30 seconds, okay. I'm not gonna let you off the hook that quick
So at some point in time there had to be you were starting to go down that path
but there had to have been a was
Beyond your own internal studies and looking at charts and observing this up-and-down nature of trends
Were you being inspired or influenced by anybody that came before you at the time?
Hmm, I would have to say no really. I was an engineer by background. I was very good with computers
and I really
You got to realize that I never was a broker. I never worked at an investment bank never was on the floor of any exchange. I
was really
Started out managing other people's money by way of an investment club and a lot of the investment club people were kind of lazy
And they left it to two of us to do most of the work. So I was one of those two guys
You know happy and an engineer by background just gave me a real heavy
Dosage of math and logic and problem-solving and how to do things efficiently
and when you're flat running out of time and you realize that if I could I
Call it putting myself out of work. I I put all human endeavor into two sort of camps of endeavor
sort of the
production side of things where you're just grinding out something that you could teach a computer to do basically
but for some reason you've decided to do it as a human being and the other side of human's ever is more the
Creative side the one where you can't really teach a computer how to create something new or a piece of art or whatever
I realize that
With limited amount of time if I was ever going to be creative and take trading to a new level and read new books
and explore new
you know research angles
Then I had to get the actual trading function the buying and selling and where am I going to buy and where I'm going to sell
How much am I going to buy how much am I going to sell?
I had to get that to a point where it was so cookbook I could get it done in
You know very short amounts of time so that I'd have any time left to do anything creative
And so I basically set out with back in the days when the number if you remember the Radio Shack trash
80 TRS 80 was the first computer I got and I went from there to the IBM
PC and bought an 80 after that and I just kept programming and programming and my
sole purpose was to just put myself out of work in terms of trading every day and
Evolved into a very very automated trend set capital that basically made no decisions by human beings day after day
It was just basically a very very automated
Operation covering some 80 futures markets and
What 30 currency markets and about 20 mutual funds that we traded and
By I don't know how many different strategies or how many different dollars, and it was it was very complicated
But you just buy another computer, and you just crank it
Well, let me let me bring you back even further a little bit, so you're you're
Self-taught you are on the outside you are not a part of you know the trading floor up in New York City somewhere
You're not on the exchange floor, so
Talk to me about when it kind of hit you that okay
Well gosh
There's all these guys out there doing fundamentals about you know Warren Buffett's a value guy
And you've made the decision that you're going to use
Prices is your is your core variable, and you're gonna you're gonna start to code this
So this this is all this the buying and selling of
Prices a variable and figuring out how much to bet that was something that you were
Trial and error figuring out on your own with without really any outside
Influences yeah a little bit
What the reason I I started looking at some of my early very very early stuff that I did
You know like the mutual fund purchase with the load mutual fund manager guy the salesman and other
purchases of actual stock after that nice you know I looked a little bit at fundamentals and realized it was a quagmire of
accounting information to get through took too much time and I realized that no matter what I did it seemed like
There's always going to be somebody with a lot more time and staffs of people and I had other engineers at, Montana
Would we be sitting there and lunch and say what makes you think you can do any better than some Wall Street firm with you
know teams of analysts figuring all this stuff out and I got to thinking about that and I
started getting more global and sort of distant from it all and realizing that
Everything that all these people do ends up somehow you know in a what I
Thought of as a battle I
Imagined going back to the say the Waterloo days, and you got Napoleon and Wellington up on the hills
Watching their armies down in the valley
maybe
And you could watch the front line and sort of going to the left and going to the right and depending on who's winning at
Anyone point in time and I thought of that was my my picture for what goes on in the marketplace
There's lots of people doing lots of different things and some of them are buying and some of them are selling and
They all think they're right. They all think they they know what they're doing and they're doing it for a reason
But the sum total of all of that is where the price ends up or in the case of the battle where the front line
Is so I thought well if I could just chart this
Then I know where everybody out there that's participating wants to put this price, and if I just watch that
And see that it's the battle is being won by one side over the other like in other words the buyers are beating the
Sellers this time around
Then I might as well go lean that way because it looks like they are winning the battle
If the sellers are winning the battle it'd be probably good to go that way
I didn't really think that much more about it than that and
that kind of
Still my thinking into what I did for the rest of my life and still doing today
You know we have a we have a mutual friend who is
Featured in my book that came out last summer the little book of trading actually two mutual friends featured in that book
Eric Crittenden and Cole Wilcox
It's brilliant, and I asked Cole the other day. I said well. You know I'm gonna be talking to Tom
You know what what would be a good question from your perspective, and he said that that
You're like. What's old guys. What's what's coming next, but he wanted you
He wanted you to talk about lessons that you learned about life
Outside of trading where things didn't work. He said that he had really learned a lot from you about that
I hope I'm not hitting you blindsided
No, it's okay. You can ask me anything
The lessons that I learned of things that didn't work hmm
He must have something that he that stuck in his head that that you had inspired him on
Well you know like for instance one thing that I was kind of I
Don't I guess astonished that is back in the days when I had just before I retired I
created this
Gosh, it was like a Cadillac of
Something like six different programs that trendset was running across all the markets that we traded across all the computers
We traded this thing was so diversified. It was a multi-manager fund basically however run by one manager
So all the fees offset I did all my fee
calculations and incentive fees based on the aggregate total of it all
so for
One hedge fund you could get
The exposure to mutual fund timing of several different techniques you'd get approach to
Currencies you could get into some options trading on the agricultural commodities
You got about 80 different futures markets using some like three different techniques
Long short term in a medium term and all automated all offset in a very reasonable
Fee schedule
Far far cheaper than a lot of the fee schedules that people were paying for and I did a hundred and fifty appointments
And of course nobody's ever accused me of being the best salesman in the world, so we could always
You know put that as a caveat out there
But I did a hundred fifty appointments on market math which was the the big flagship that we had and I was the largest
Investor in market math, and it was making some very nice money. That's why I'm retired now
and I
Got zero dollars from my hundred and fifty appointments at which time I decided you know I
I'm tired of beating my head against the wall. It doesn't seem like these people get it now years later
People who are still in the industry like Eric and Cole who I think are brilliant guys actually
They
Have told me that there's now more single manager
Multi-strategy funds out there now and that probably I was just a little bit too ahead of my time on that one
but I just you know that's an example of something where as I read the industry and as you become part of an industry if you
you're speaking to the
Professional money manager wannabes that are coming up and trying to figure something out
It seems to me you have to do an exceptionally good job of figuring out what it is your client wants first
And then giving it to them
even if that sometimes
Isn't the best idea
Over the very long run
but if you want to stay in business and you really want to raise a lot of assets so that you can fund those things that
You really I think are the important things that are the good long-term
Decisions you have to consider the fact that a good idea that nobody buys is is
Not gonna happen. Yeah, it's interesting that you bring up that point because I had caught and doing a little homework on before we talk today
I had caught in an email exchange that you had with Ed sakota a few years back and
You were commenting on the fact that I guess somewhere on his his questions and answers page
Somebody made a comment that you don't like much heat and I'm gonna give you a second here to explain to
Novices that term but and you respond you said well, hold on
It's not necessarily that but I am giving clients what they can handle
Exactly one of the biggest things that I found fault with a lot of money managers in my era and the early going
And some of them are still out there. Some of them have already retired and some of them have blown up
Is this concept that ad calls heat I just call it how much risk are you putting into the portfolio and I think risk can be
Measured by a lot of different approaches the ones that I used
Were specifically a percent of equity
Of the risk to the stop loss
So take your risk from where you are to wherever the stop is
That's one form of risk as a percent of equity
The next one is volatility. How fast does a market move up or down each day as a percent of your equity the third
Picks up weird guys like euro dollars or in the old days and some high margin low
Volatility types of instruments that every now and again go crazy. And if you have too much of them in the portfolio
You're taking on too much risk
Markets are smart enough to add the margin in there
So I had margin as a percent of equity and I would just do all three of those calculations and take this the lower of the
Whichever one came out the lowest in terms of number of contracts
That was how many I did. So I always aired to the conservative side the least amount of contracts the least amount of exposure and
by doing that I
Think I kept my you know
I can't say that I lulled my clients to sleep
But I tried not to draw attention to myself in terms of clients looking at things every day and being overly
Caffeinated and calling me about every other hour
Saying do you see what gold did today or something?
I think that was not going to serve the client
Well, because they're basically going to always be excited when it's up and distraught when it's down
I was trying to level up my psychology of my clients and I was trying to
Make sure that my own psychology was very level. I didn't want to get excited either
That's why Jack picked up on the mr. Serenity thing, I guess
Everything in trend stats life pretty pretty much every day was
somewhat boring
You know
I still remember the first time I walked into Bill Dunn's office many moons ago when I had no clue about this industry and
I thought I was in a CPAs office an attorney's office
I was like, where where am I because I literally weeks before that I had been on Solomon
Solomon Brothers trading floor a World Trade 7 and I was just like well, this is not making any sense. What's going on here?
But you know, you know, it's funny you you bring up this
I brought up that email that you mentioned but in that same email you made an interesting comment and you you said that
You talked about the desire to make sure clients could stand the heat
But you you mentioned and this was kind of a I guess you were you were announcing some retirement at that time
But you said that you you would approach your own portfolio different now
There's people listening to us today who perhaps don't want to be a trend following trader for their own account
And perhaps they want to trade with
Put their money with a trend following trader
But for those that that hear me say that where you say, okay, I'm helping clients one way
But I'm willing to do something else from my portfolio. Maybe you can explain that differential like what and I'm assuming you met
You were willing to be you were willing to have a little more volatility and take more risk. I'm assuming maybe I'm wrong
Yeah, exactly right in terms of my own personal portfolio
Which has gotten larger over the years and it spans quite a lot of different markets and things and because I understand
Exactly what I'm doing and I understand where my risks are I can scenario analysis to death
Anything that I think might happen and feel like I can live with what I'm doing
Take is a good example. My mother who's 83 and
Less than a hundred thousand to her name in terms of you know
You know just retirement and IRAs and stuff like that
She's gonna sit there with zero knowledge
She almost is confused by what a CD at a bank is that's the level of knowledge that she's got
So it's it's like kind of like the opposite spectrum when I start talking about anything financial her eyes glaze over
She has no idea what I'm saying
When you put yourself in the position of what would you do for a person like that and what could they feel comfortable with I?
Think as a money manager since you're being paid to manage other people's money one of your first questions has to be
What are my clients all gonna look like and how can I provide them something that I think that they will hire me for and
Keep me on the books for a long period of time
Otherwise you're I think a lot of CTAs in the past especially is probably more
So when I was coming up there was a lot of very very high leverage guys and their household names
That it'd be their come-and-gone or are still out there. I won't spare you the list, but
You know these guys could do 50% in a year
And then they'd lose 20 and then they do 60 up and then another
27 down and you know they're all over the map and their attitude is
I'm gonna trade the way I think is best to trade to make the most amount of money over the long run
And if you want to come along for a ride with me, you're welcome to mr. Client. Yeah, I approached it the other way around
I said I'm willing to
Shane you know to sort of harness myself down a little bit
Because my job is to be a money manager
I need to be thinking about what my clients are looking for not what I might want to do myself
Because they're not prepared to do what I would do in that harnessing down though, too. I'm
Guessing that you saved yourself quite a bit of grief because while I'm not
Criticizing any of the guys that took the big risk and did the 50 the 50 up and 25 down
I'm sure they heard from their clients a lot more and in a negative way perhaps
Well, and they had money come in and out they'd you know
They'd raise a hundred million and then they'd go down to 50 million and then they're up to 250 million and then down the hundred million
I gotta believe they must be hiring people firing people. It must be a just a chaotic way to run a business
Let me let me jump into and we can talk a little I'm gonna come back to some of the to the
Big picture trading principles that that you've developed over, you know over your career
But I wanted to jump into
Psychology the psychology of trading because I have a feeling
near and dear to you
That is where a lot of this success lies and whether you're just a flat old entrepreneur or a trader or whatnot
That the psychology of how you can make it through each day
I think sometimes maybe we all lose sight of such a basic sounding idea. Mm-hmm. I agree and it's the most important thing
I believe in investing. It's way ahead of
The second most important thing which would be risk control and volatility control and basically all your money management side
Which is way ahead of the importance of what everybody concentrates on is doing simulation on buy-sell decision models
That's the least important thing to worry about
That's not changed though Tom. That's still for the vast majority folks out there. They still love that
But basically the simple reasons easy to see I've done studies and I've published and they've been other studies way beyond what I did
Where you take markets?
Do random number generator to buy or sell put a good stop-loss behind it do good money management with it and you get a
positive return on investment, so
If you're flipping a coin to buy and sell
How important can the buy and sell decision model be if you've put good money management behind it and you end up over time?
Making a slight amount of money with a reasonable amount of risk
but but even more so than that think about the psychology a
lot of people used to think of trendstad and Tom Bosso as a sort of a
I don't know robotic firm, you know, like we didn't think or we didn't do anything but
In reality, I'm the guy that has the name on the you know, that owns the company
Any moment I want to I can change any of those black boxes that we're running, right?
So if I don't have good psychology don't understand what I'm doing understand
You know
What buttons of mine are tending to be pushed with certain types of market action and I stay the course and I know
That this is normal or I know that something else is not normal and I need to do some work on that
I need to understand myself and
The psychology that's being
Being you know thrown into my face and my brain because if I don't I'm lost
I just I could change the models every day if I wanted to just because of computers
So this ecology is the most important thing of all because that will drive
What everybody does it'll allow it?
Forces them to abandon systems that are basically sound systems just because it's on a slight drawdown. They start tweaking things
they overcomplicate things or they
overly simplified things or they
They get on a run and get full of themselves and start leveraging too much and then they blow up
There's lots of different ways it can hit you but understanding yourself is the most important thing of all
Let me let's break that down some because I think sometimes people want to get down down a brass tacks
So when you say understand yourself, so
Tell me about Tom
Getting upset or Tom not getting upset
Did you go through your whole trading career on kind of an even keel where they're with their ups and downs emotionally?
How did you talk to me some examples? So I'll swagger swagger documented this one. It's a well-known example of a situation where
There was two different situations and they're both involved silver strangely
I don't know how that happened, but I was trading silver. This is back. Probably. I'm in the business maybe four or five years and
My mom and dad were gonna come and visit me down in st. Louis, which is where we were at that time
so I just a dutiful son take off the the one week and you know play to our guide and
You know it's working as a chemical engineer running them around didn't have time to update my stuff
Missed a silver trade that broke out but being the good discipline trader that I am
Decided no breakout already happened not gonna jump in late, you know
And I updated all my stuff after my mom dad had left and I just missed it
And that turned out to be the most profitable trade of any market during the entire year
so it was very frustrating watching it and I realized that I
Needed to make sure that that didn't happen again because I didn't want to be frustrated like that
So what I did was I told myself if I'm going to create a strategy
I have to be able to run it every single day day after day and I'm not missing anything and I haven't missed
Trade after that for years and years and years and years
Because I put things in place and I put backups in place and I make sure things are you know
It stops and whatever I have to do to make sure if I'm going to be
Say talking to you and markets will be open or something or if I'm taking a vacation and we want to Italy this summer
I'll be there three weeks. Well, hey, you know, I'm gonna have everything taken care of I'll be trading right through it
And it won't even bother me and I'll still be on vacation
So when you use the word frustration, so I think for a lot of people maybe if they're in that situation
Instead of turning around and saying oh, let's automate the approach
I mean, it sounds like you you weren't emotionally upset. It was more of a problem to solve. Is that okay?
It was like an engineer's problem to solve. We got this, you know, and a chemical engineer
So think of it as a chemical factory. You got stuff coming in one side you process it goes out the other side and
A lot of the trading I thought of this chemical engineering to you got information coming in over a satellite, you know
com links and internet lines and everything else you process it either
manually with your eyes and your brain or by computer with databases and
programming language like we did at trendstaff and
Outcomes orders that are shipped off to exchanges and brokers and FCM's and wherever they're going
So it's sort of like that little chemical factory trend step to me was my little chemical factory
There was stuff coming in processing stuff going out
And when I look at in the early days my trading I thought of it the same way
I've got a lot of information. I've got to get it done every day
I don't have a lot of time to do it
So let's make it as quickly and it automated as possible and then I go on and ship orders and go on the rest of my life
So that was what I thought of it as problem-solving
But the other example involving silver is probably a little closer to an emotional reaction
I would say this was a silver trade my account had gotten up to I think about
This is in the early years of trading. I think I was up to like
I want to say 50 to a hundred thousand. I can't remember the exact number. I
Hit the same silver
Upswing that the hunts were trying to corner if you remember back to those days
Due to silver solely and you know, I'm here. I'm the trend follower
I'm gonna stick with this and I've got so many contracts and then and let your profits run cut your losses short and
Silver starting to go limit
Up and down all over the place and the hunt stuff comes out and it collapses back and I've got my stops in I'm fine
But I saw my account go from like a hundred thousand up to five hundred thousand in
Just a month or six weeks or something insane and I saw it in the next two weeks go down to
250,000 I ended up making I don't know
$150,000 on the one trade and at that level it was probably a hundred fifty percent return on my portfolio
This is way before I understood
What I understand now
but out of that I
Can tell you without a doubt I was watching silver every day
I almost didn't care about the rest of my portfolio
It was very emotional attachment up and down and all over the place and I said wait a second
You caught yourself with that initial attachment. It caught myself with the emotional attachment. I always have had this sort of
Tendency in my brain to be able to sit back at the end of the day and observe how I interacted with the day
and it's a very useful thing to have sort of an observer self that can
Sort of be impartial if you want to think of them that way and and to sit back
Sounds like a split personality, but I'm not meaning to make it sound crazy
You just want to be introspective and you want to be non-judgmental and you just want to sit there and say
You know, how did you do today? Did you were you even keel? Did you do all the things you were supposed to do today?
Did you get mad at somebody? Did you were you overly?
Excited to the point of missing something
Did you get emotional here? What you know just kind of do a little bit of a counting summary of how the day go
You know when I looked at the silver thing I decided, you know
I was right in being a good trend follower and putting my stops in and letting the profits run and cutting the losses short
But there was no reason
why I had to let my emotions go up and down and all over the place if I just controlled the size of my position and
That led to me to my very first
Risk control scheme which was to say that as the stops got farther and farther away in the case of silver
My risk got humongous
There was no reason to have however many I can't remember how many I had let's say I had five or ten or positions
Maybe I needed six. Maybe I needed four. Maybe I only needed one contract
During the Gulf War breaking out at trendstad
I think we had maybe one or two clients that ended up with one crude oil contact contract on after the volatility went from
32 overnight to 40 and back down and opened up the next day at 22 or something
That was insane volatility and it just completely kicked all of the positions out of everybody's portfolio because nobody had enough equity to afford
even one contract
So we took care of the problem easily and there's no big deal. I
Think that a lot of people get caught up in the emotion of the thing and then they just think well
That's what trading is all about. You know, they're I
Mean Jack swagger even admitted to me that he loves caffeine and coffee and when he was interviewing me
I think one of the reasons he thought of me as mr. Serenity is he's just exactly the opposite
He's overly caffeinated and extremely hard-working and very quick and you know
Stay up all night and finish the chapter on the book and all that and they're really that's not very healthy over the long run
I don't think and it I don't think it helps your trading
because you're sitting there trying to
Cloud your judgment with all these, you know
chemical imbalances in your body from all the emotions that are driving you and you know from
Frustrated to depression to excitement to euphoria to you know, everything else that can happen in training
and the markets love to push your buttons, so
If you can sit back and figure out how your buttons got pushed and figure out a way to round that
I think you're well served and training to do that. Let me I got an angle here for you
So are you a golf fan you call it? I just just came back from the range. Actually, okay
So so I'm not a huge golf fan
But I followed it enough and you know, I I caught the end of the Masters
Okay, and obviously this this this and some of my family's from the south
So this great southern character Bubba Watson, you know hits the shot, you know
Basically lays it all out there wins the Masters
I take nothing away from him because some of our legendary sports feats or are one-shot and that's and you go down in
The Hall of Fame with that but here you are you're you're talking about your process
Tom is focused on process process process. You're not sitting around necessarily thinking about the outcome
You're you're focused in your process. You're grinding it out. So I look at Bubba's shot and I think to myself
Some of the guys that did exceptionally well and the real estate crisis John Paulson Michael burry guys
They're exceptionally smart made great trades
but maybe you can talk to the person that's listening out there and
Explain the idea of laying it all on the line in the in the world of money to try and hit one home run
Versus grinding out a career and maybe lay out the pros and cons to people
well, okay the
Making one shot and I think a lot of people have indicated that Buffett sort of falls into this
Rule and that he has made the lion's share of his profits off of a select few
Very big home runs that he said over this entire career
But he said plenty of losers along the way too and and that kind of gets glossed over a lot
and then that result of it all is the winners of course of
More than paid for the losers as we find in most trend following cases, you know, that's fine
He has a big image that way
But examine the the trend stats of the world that are just grinding it out and trying to you know
keep their clients happy and not do anything too flashy and and all that and
You know, I think I would summarize my my image in the industry back in the day. Probably is boring
I think a lot of people
Probably would not have gotten too awfully excited
I mean Jack Schwager wasn't even going to interview me look all I was never boring to you though, was it?
Well, it was never boring to me. I was doing you know, I was running a nice business
I thought we had a good clientele. I thought we had a good crew of
Staff at trend stat. I enjoyed running the business when I did run it. I'm enjoying retirement now that I'm not running it. I
Probably would enjoy life every day. No matter what I was doing probably
But I think that the lesson to be learned here is if you want to hit the home run and all that
that's fine, but
let's not
Consider that Bubba Watson was not running his process
he
He likes to move the ball. He was out at my club just a few weeks ago
Ended up shooting 67 there from the back tees and made it look easy
Went shot 58 the next day up at a stancho, which is a pretty difficult desert course
He likes to move the ball. So he can take a shot. He's a lefty
That shot was well in his wheelhouse
He can imagine it he can hit a wedge turn it down and he's gonna make that ball go left to right a whole lot more
Than most people probably could humanly do that, but that's his normal way of playing. So that wasn't out of his
comfort level or anything
that's a that's a really good analogy just made me have the light bulb moment because
If you if you say I remember there's a traitor that I
Interviewed for a book last summer named Paul Mulvaney and Paul had his system his trend following system
And when he came into the fall of 2008, he had no earthly idea that October of 08 would produce him
40% in the month. However, he was following his process. So I think that's the exact point you're making isn't it?
Yeah, same same thing true of our currency programs in 97
when the Japanese yen was I think we were getting down to
The yen dollar was down to I think it had 80 or something
Turned around I forget whether it came down from 150 or
Then turned around went back to 140 or something. It was like huge swing one way huge swing the other way and
I'm sitting in this thing with all of our programs for I'm in my trade
I'm just rolling it every month rolling it rolling it rolling it rolling it rolling it
I'm in the same trade for like a year and a half. I
Mean people think of trading is okay. You buy today and you sell next week
This was buying and selling over a whole year and a half in commodities for crown allowed or currencies
But that made me so much money
It's made the client so much money and the incentive fees off of that and everything else. I mean
That was probably the record year that I was in the business in terms of amount of money that trend set made and I
Had no clue that that was going to happen
I'm not I'm sort of an amateur
Economist in terms of I understand a lot about economics and you watch some of my Facebook posts
I know which way I lean on a lot of things you have no opinions Tom
I'm more libertarian by you know by you know philosophy and all that but I I like to examine
Economics from the standpoint of how the behavior of the people involved with the decision
If you look at it from that standpoint usually could figure out which way
Economics will go and almost anything that you would propose and it just seems like so much of what goes on today doesn't do that
And it's and then there's this big surprise when it doesn't work. I don't know what you gotta be kidding me. It's not that hard
But I keep making the case to folks
I say well listen if you if you believe that we're in this this world of chaos and I
Can't know what's gonna happen in the future. Maybe it'll just become this nice serene
Environment, but if we are in this world of chaos, what can one do to participate in chaos to or maybe it's not the right word
To actually excel, but let me I'm gonna jump into something for for those folks out there that that are maybe
Further along and they want to hear something more interesting. I'm holding in my hands here
Oh, by the way, before I even say this, I think we met before
Oh, I think we you'll have to correct my memory
1996 in Berlin Managed Futures Association conference. Were you there? Yes, I was that's where he met cuz I was sat next to each other
But anyways, that's either here to there. I because I was thinking I'm so many people. I'm afraid
I'm sure I would have remembered you but I apologize. No, no, I was just trying to make sure I wasn't completely losing my marbles
so I'm holding in my hands a
document that I have
Done my level-headed best to and I hope hopefully you won't you won't have counsel call me up and go Koval get rid of that
I've I've been
Disseminating this off my websites for eons when to allocate to a CTA buy them on sale. Yes, Tom Basso
From a from a few years ago. However, it's amazing how many times today to still to this day
I will talk to traders that are either running their own accounts or
Trading a fund and they have this mentality and I've got a buddy who runs a small fund who literally there must be some
Systematic index of trend followers that he actually will look at just for kind of extra guidance
Not part of his system where he kind of thinks that it kind of it actually correlates
Sometimes when his funds starts to gear up on positions, but anyways, why do I let you kind of just?
Your professor, you know professor Tom and I've got this white paper here in front of me
How would you generally explain this idea to people that are either new or experienced the idea buying a trader on sale?
Okay. Well if you figure out about what drives trend following
Trend following is driven by
The fact that there's asymmetrical returns. There's there's there's big long runs like the Japanese yen trade that I just talked about
By sometimes when I total up all of the trend stat trades over an entire year, maybe two or three of the trades
Paid for all the profits if you could isolate them up pick them up and say okay
I could just get these three trades that was the difference between
Zero and whatever it is. We made that year all the rest of the trades
Maybe even netted out to zero. There was some trade some years where it was that close
So if you make the assumption that there's going to be periods of time where the market goes sideways
Which the stock market is a good example right now
It seems to me like the last I don't know three weeks or so. It's gone nowhere
It's basically in a range and it's bouncing around and every day
It seems like if it's going down one day goes up the next day and down again and up again
During that type of an environment trend followers are not going to make money because there's no trend to follow
Typically if you're depending on where your time frames are unless you're trading each one of those little swings and doing some short-term trend following
There isn't a trend long enough for the kind of once a day guide to to really catch much
on the other hand, there's going to be periods like back in 97 when the
Japanese yen goes crazy or maybe in the future when the dollar goes down a lot or something like that, whatever
those types of
trades more than pay up for all the losses during the sideways periods if you then make the assumption that
There's always an end to a sideways period and there's always an end to the profitable period then it would make sense
To look at a trend follower who's trading lots of markets
Lots of noise creating drawdowns lots of trending markets creating profitable periods
To actually sort of if you want trade the the traders
Rebalance yourself when you when one trader makes too much money and is getting really really
You know leveraged and going crazy, you know
Maybe you back off some money there and you spread it amongst other traders that are acting a little more conservative and might be able
to hold on to those profits during the next
static sideways period where everybody is going to tend to lose money and it vice versa when you get a
Somebody in a deep drawdown unless he's changed something or you've lost complete
You know
What trust and what he's doing then tell you know balance right back into the guy
That's on the biggest drawdown because you're gonna he's coming up on the next period which will be as big as profitable period again
It seems like the industry does exactly the opposite of that
I did another white paper called performance gap, which was difference between CTA returns and client returns
And I did the top
It turned out everybody over 75 million and up that had a five-year track record in the ma our database back in the old days
Which doesn't even exist today? I think it's Barclays these days and out of the 27 CTAs that met that criteria
27 out of 27 times and boy is that telling the time weighted return that the CTA was actually providing by trading
Was greater than the dollar way to return that the clients actually got by all they're chasing the hot track record and pulling it
Out at the bottom and all the nonsense that clients went through. It's very frustrating and very sad
It it it saddened me to see basically my clientele out there
Doing stuff that hurt themselves from making a good return
And I wrote about it and I didn't seem to do any good to anybody. I don't know
So Tom psychologically, why would you say the investors don't invest on drawdowns? I
Think psychologically because they don't really understand trading
They can't deal with their own psychology and they don't realize how important psychology is
So what ends up happening is when they see it down they kind of in the mind you start
Extrapolating that dotted line down, you know down down down down. It's going to be X months before I'm totally gone or something and
Likewise, I think
Psychology on the upside is you know
This guy's got a great track record for five years and it keeps going up and up and up and never goes down
and so let's draw that dotted line up to off the top of the chart and
Which one would I rather have I'd rather I mean, you know in my mind have that guy
That's going off the top of the chart rather than the one that's going to lose me all my money
I think that's the they don't they don't step back from themselves and realize the trap
They're putting themselves in and they don't understand even why trend followers have made money over the long run
I'm sure you get tons of criticisms and focus focus and all the I see some of the Facebook comments and
you know you
It's really easy to sit there and and plot monthly volatility of say a market which I've done
In trends that's case. I took I don't know how many different markets we did it on
But months where there was a large volatility where the months that were profitable by trend following strategies
Months with small volatility were months where the systems basically lost money
So large volatility profit low volatility and low direction
You know losses and it so it's a simple is
If you looked at a whole year of monthly returns and monthly types of indexes indices in the
Various markets being traded. You should be almost able to predict what should have been the average CTA's returns for
February
Because these following things occurred. It was probably a losing month or these things occurred. It was probably a winning month
It was a big winning month or a small winning month. You could actually just
Judgmental yourself right into it if you had the data and you understood where trend following returns came from
But all these fancy people with all their doctorates and all their computers and staff don't seem to be able to figure that out
And so here I was in trends that's case
You know buying my own programs when they were in a drawdown
And meanwhile my clients are calling up firing me and then people would be throwing money into my hedge funds when I was making new
Highs and I'm taking some money off the table and giving it away to other managers are doing other things with it. You know trying to
Salt it away to take some off the table and even out my portfolio
But and so I found myself doing exactly the opposite what my clients were doing all the time
And I'm trying to convince them to do what I'm suggesting they do, but they would not hear anything of it
That was that was the question was to lead to is it some folks are just it's they're never gonna change
It's not gonna it's not gonna happen
It is one of the several reasons why I just decided you know to call it a day and move on to golf and fishing and
Cooking and dancing and singing and singing hold on so you're gonna sing for us
I I was I was on stage with Ed's Dakota doing his banjo last
That was a year and a half ago. So you're gonna sing for us. What are you singing for us today?
Are you not gonna sing? Oh, I cut what kind of what kind of singing? Well, I like fly me to the moon
And let me live about those stars
There we go. I've got a first. I've actually made news today, right? Yeah
Let me let me I know we've only got a few more minutes here
I know I told you I wouldn't keep you past an hour, but I'm I'm good as long as you want to go
Okay. Well, then we'll keep playing here. Um, I've I've got a
a lot of different experiences over the years with talking to different folks and and I know you'll probably have some other thoughts on this but
Sometimes when I talk to folks that have been in your position
Running a successful phone for a long time nice track record
They say things that most people I think if you're there on that the outside looking in they don't expect to hear
I'll let you comment on this. So two examples in the last couple years that hit me. I had a chance to speak with
David Harding over in London several times and he starts talking about you know
He's looking to be a cockroach and and looking to be like Madonna and and and then Salem Abraham is talking about how to
Avoid a meteor strike. Okay, and clearly they're talking about surviving like
They're worried about surviving and they talk talk to that notion where you know
because every the average person sees the headlines of these guys made all this money and they're
But the reality is to have the chance to make it you've got to be there still
Exactly that and one of the things that I think is the only reason probably why you're talking to me right now
might be or one of the reasons that you're it's you're able to be talking to me, let's say is that I
Was able to by controlling risk controlling volatility avoiding the meteor strike that Salim would talk about or David's
Cockroach thing. Yeah, both are interesting analogies
You're I looked at as I must I have to play today's game so that I can play the game tomorrow
If I'm out of the game tomorrow, I've done nobody and he I've done no good for anybody
You've got to be able to keep playing the game because statistics
It's like the casino that if you're trying to get the statistics on your side
And I think trend following does that well, it doesn't even better if you use very very good money management models
control your risk control your volatility control your margin control the types of markets you select trade and by which strategies and all those things and
that's where a lot of the work is very fruitful and I think once you
Have something that you feel comfortable works and you understand how it works intimately
I mean down into your soul, you know exactly
What type of market is going to feed your profits and what type of market you're going to be licking your wounds
but you're able to
Keep coming back and playing that game tomorrow as long as you can do that
Then the statistics are going to end up working out in your favor over the long run and you're a survivor
and you can have a 28 or 30 year run in the industry like I did and
Be around long enough so that people actually recognize your name because you've been at so many
MFA conferences or MRA conferences and shaking so many people's hands and
Had people interview you and you know been quoted in Wall Street Journal or whatever and you know, it's just because you survived
It wasn't necessarily because you were flashy
Let me I'm gonna jump around a couple of you talked about this already
You mentioned that the kind of if you can look at the market the markets
Movement and you consider low volatility and high volatility
You can almost start to figure out where the CTA universe might be making their money
But talk to me and maybe talk to folks out there the idea that I regularly see this where people
Really truly imagine they're gonna make money every month
Somehow or another they're gonna make money every month and I've
And I'm sure there's probably somebody out there
Maybe because their server is right next to the exchange server or something and they've got some they you know
They're trading on light speed something that I don't even understand
But I've said recently that whenever I see a track record and part of my background was looking at all these track records
Like well, this is so great. Look at all the before I knew anything about trend follows really CTA track records
This is such a wealth of information
But as I as time has moved on
I've realized that if if a track record exists that shows me making one to two percent every month with ever
With never a down month. I say to myself. I've either got
Long-term capital management on my hands a strategy that's gonna blow up or Bernard Madoff on my hands
Yeah, I would agree with that or a third solution to that
Eric Crittenden would say you've got a short volatility manager
Probably and short volatility would mean it'd be something like selling naked options
For instance if you sell them far enough out and you sell them far enough away from the money the vast majority of the time
The option expires worthless you make that money
So you can produce profits this month and next month and next month and next month and next month and then you have the long
term capital
Where somebody's leveraged a whole lot and that short volatility comes to roost with a very large
Movement in the markets and the volatility blows up and they're short the volatility
So it just kills them and with the leverage and everything else
three years of profits month monthly profits in a row just go down the drain and they blow up and they're gone and
so yeah, I very suspicious of
Track records that are if they're professing to be trend followers and doing it month after month of profits
My hat would be off to them. I don't you got to be
Really figuring that one out cuz it's it's a tough nut to crack. So let me go at Professor Tom again
So I'm showing up at your class and it's
financial psychology
101 I'm 18 years old. I really don't know much about anything now
I'm forcing you to to go back in time to how you would communicate to that audience
Because in many ways that audience is is the general audience out there
So what are you saying on the first day of class when you start the presentation?
How are you in getting people to come to the point where they're ultimately gonna build to hopefully to have
Your foundation and your your background and your knowledge, but what do they have to know in that first week?
What are some of the basics that we really want people to get?
First first day, they don't know anything Tom. Yeah, you know, it's it's difficult
before even can even deal with things simple things like what would a moving average do or what a trend following model might be or
how to control risk or volatility you'd have to actually know how to put in it, you know a
Stock trade my mom for instance the 83 year old retiree
Would not even know what a stockbroker was wouldn't have one doesn't know how to even articulate an order. So
She would have a hard time even doing the basic first trade
So you'd have to teach people
something basic about the market how to put a trade in and the fact that the market is a place where buyers and sellers come together
basically, and once you got past the nuances of whether it's futures markets and you're dealing with ticks and currency markets you're dealing with pips and
And so on and so forth and you got through that maybe in the first day you could then get on to
The
issues or the I think the three pillars of success for trading and one of them is going to be
understanding what it is that you're trying to do and
What I mean by that is you're gonna have to each person is gonna have to come to some conclusion of why the markets do
What they do
There may be those that think economics drives it because their economics majors and that's what they want to base everything of their decision on
you're gonna have to come to that conclusion and then you're gonna have to build risk and volatility and
Portfolio selection around what your comfort level is and then you're gonna have to work on a buy and sell decision model
And once you have those three things together, you have a shot at being successful even if you're an economist
Wouldn't be my cup of tea, but you know, I'm sure there's economists out there. They're doing just fine
If they can get everything together, but then that's the way I would approach it
Let's try to teach teach those three things the understanding of what you want to do and what makes the markets work from your viewpoint
not from Michael Koval's
Viewpoint or Tom Basso's it it's basically
what drives the individual doing the trade because it's you who has to
decide to stick with the system or
Abandon it or add new markets or tweak the strategy or all the things that go on and if you're not comfortable with that
I think gonna happen but you also have to have control of what markets you trade some are gonna make sense to you some are not
You're also gonna have to have a decision model that could be something like a breakout on a chart or a moving average going
Over or whatever it is. You're gonna have to have something to trigger your action
And I think those three things you get those together. You're probably got a shot at at least getting into the game
Well, you know since since it is
2012 and as far as I know with technology and interviews and stuff. I don't know what the rules are
I have no training in anything. I have to ask you. What are you what are you thinking about these days?
What you know, this doesn't necessarily have to just be an interview. I want to know what what is Tom thinking about these two
Besides the fun part the singing the golf the dancing. I know your brain is still thinking about stuff
So what are some of the things that that you might want to leave people with today?
That the kind of the the big picture
Baby, it could be a life parable anything you might want to say that's just near and dear to you right now
I would say the thing that I think about the most and I've noticed several folks Facebook posts
Like some of the friends that you have and some of the friends that I have these days and we have some of the same
friends
And I'm seeing this over and over again
And there's a lot of us out here in the trading world and you know, you get the bigger I've I've traded 80 commodity markets
I've traded 30 currency markets. I've traded all sorts of ETFs and mutual funds. I used to trade stocks
I used to trade options. I used to trade treasury bonds even
And I sit here in today's environment. We're running up another five trillion in debt. We're debasing the dollar with all the QE
12 whatever
Quantitative easing I'm sitting here trying to figure out each day. How am I supposed to financially survive in retirement?
And protect and grow my assets and I'm a guy that has traded almost everything that is tradable
And I feel really sorry for like the people like my mother who has confused by a CD
Because I am having a hard time coming up with ways
You know aside from doing my basic trend following stuff and trying to go with the trends that we all do
in some months having a better month than other months, but
you get this feeling like
The trend followers of the world are going to nail it and things are going to go
Collapsing or go skyrocketing inflation or whatever happens
The trend followers are absolutely going to nail it, but you're going to win the race
And then you're going to look around and say yeah, but
Yeah, post post-apocalyptic. Yeah. Yeah, you know I sit there and I think okay
Let's see if you're a successful trader, and you're part of the 1% and you're looking at
What it is that you're supposed to be doing to position your portfolio, and if you're in a client business your clients portfolio
So that they can preserve their purchasing power over the long run what I call net wealth instead of net worth
You got to increase your net worth to keep your net wealth the same in an era where the dollar is getting debased
It's very difficult to see how to do that
Tom you and you're but you're not saying that also
I mean you've you've you've got a few decades of experience here
You've seen many different climates many different markets many different
socioeconomic political patterns and
Are you expressing a feeling about?
2012 and going forward that's much different than you felt in your lifetime
I feel like we're setting up for the potential for some very large moves which trend followers are going to love
So it's this feeds your your game that you're your yeah, but I'll let's let's just clarify here
So people don't I don't immediately get the emails Tom Tom's make a predictions. No
I just have the sense that
We're straining the financial structure of the country to the point where now debt is over
You know there's more than a hundred percent. It's like it's like a hundred eight percent GDP
That's getting to be pretty you know unusual and rarified air
In other words if you look at the economic statistics of the United States and even the rest of the world
We're pushing levels to levels that have not been seen before
when you get that type of stuff you have the potential for collapses you have the potential for bubbles and
The bubbles bursting possibly you see you have some very very high volatility potential I
Have no prediction about which way anything is going to go I?
think I hope
That trend following would probably be there to capitalize on a lot of those major boobs however at the same time
Capitalizing it I'm concerned that the value of what you have when you're all done with it
Well greater net worth than you have today
Might not be worth as much
To go out and buy anything with it as it does today
Right now you feel like in a retirement situation my grandfather lived to 98. I'm 59 now
So you know I'm a great health. I'm enjoying life, but if I were to live to my grandfather's age 98
I've still got
39 years to go that's longer than I was in the business
It's pretty pretty interesting to think in those terms decades
I've got to manage my portfolio and figure out how to you know at least keep my net wealth
Roughly the same so I could continue to enjoy a nice retirement well
it's
It's the one thing that crosses my mind more and more lately
It's it's a tough puzzle to think about because the solution sort of is out there
You know in the hands of like the entire country not just me. I can't control what happens around me. I you know
I've even looked at jeez I traveled all over the world. I've looked at thought about it. You know
What would have I moved to Australia? How would that be in our Switzerland or Britain or you know?
I've been to all those places, and they're all you know fine in their own ways nice places to visit
But I call the USA home, and I like Phoenix, Arizona. I think it's a great place to live
You'd have to be hard-pressed to get me out of here, but
Given that I've made that decision to stay here
And I've got to then the state of Arizona in the country of the United States around me
I have to live with you know I don't know how many
Hundreds of thousands of pages of tax code to deal with my taxes
And I have to deal with you know all the different economic decisions that are made that I'm pulling on my hair over and saying
Yeah, you got to be kidding me. That's a stupid thing to do
and
But if we keep making those stupid decisions. I feel like I'm going to be in the middle of this
chaotic
Nonsense trying to survive along with everybody else admittedly with maybe more knowledge about what I might be able to do
But right at the moment. It's really hard for me to figure out an easy answer
To be able to articulate to someone saying you know
I think we should do the following one two three four five
And that'll probably set you up to be able to survive fine
I I don't think it's just as easy as going out buying gold coins for instance
Which you see the ads all the time on the television or?
You know gold is fine. It might go up might go down people may you know take your coin in terms of
Buying something or they may not want your coin
There's a lot of unknown out there, and I think I you know back in the 70s 80s
I think the economy was a little bit
Sort of going sideways. It wasn't really robustly growing after Reagan omics kicked in it kind of got good for a while, but then
Through Clinton years. We you know we sort of did all right
Bush year was okay
And you know but I think we've strained the system so much now
Yeah, I kind of wonder whether there isn't some really big moves coming up
And so I would encourage everybody to be a trend follower here, but
Good luck figuring out how to deal with it. I mean for instance the MF global raised another issue
What if yeah, right? What if you're right and we had this issue in currency trading all the time
What if the Japanese yen goes to?
US dollar goes to ten cents or something or ten and
You just slay the heck out of it, but the place that you're doing your counterparty
You know a car party risk and all that can't pay you your profits because they're bankrupt
So you've won that you've won the battle
but
There's no victory
I think I think that's the and I'm gonna say the unspoken
I know it's spoken by some people for sure
But it seems like it's the unspoken feeling that that a lot of people that are that are awake are having right now
Which is like even if I have a good process
Even if I have worked a little bit harder than maybe the folks that are just playing
Nintendo or Xbox all day long that I still might end up in the same place that they are
Yeah, just about yeah, you might be just slightly ahead of them, but
You know
Still having a lot worse time of making your way through your day that you would be
Normally, you know, I think there's a potential for us all to be dragged
It's kind of like dragging down the 1% to be to the 99
Rather than trying to think of raising the 99 up
And getting rid of the restrictions to allow the 99% to to do better
I think we're we're approaching it the wrong way in a political sense
But we're also in the process straining the economy and a lot of the different aspects of the markets to where I have no
You know, I have to hope that
You know my commodity accounts that say they're custody that a certain FCM
Let's say is what if the FCM goes bankrupt, you know, because they've done something that I can't control. I
End up making a bunch of money on a big move. They're somehow
short that same move or whatever and
You know, they lose their shirt and they can't pay me my profits because their capital is gone
I don't know. Wow, that's
That's getting pretty out there in your thinking
But I didn't used to think of those types of things as much back in the 70s and 80s
But it seems like we're setting ourselves up for some of those types of scenarios to come to pass which is worrisome
Let me I'm gonna I'm gonna ask one more thing though, so we so I can leave you on a nice
Inspirational because I look we all feel that those things that we we know there's something wrong. That's the bottom line
We all know there's something wrong. There was a great article in New York Times the other day about
People and they're in there their phones and and everyone doesn't even they don't talk anymore
They just they yes
Everyone's walking around and their thumbs are the genetic the genetic fingerprint of the thumb is changing from doing these little devices and no
One talks they're all looking down. It's a very weird society right now besides the point
let me ask this question about entrepreneurship because clearly you've been a successful entrepreneur and I
Relate to anybody that goes out there and says man
You know, you know everybody works for the man in some capacity at some point, but you broke away
You became an entrepreneur
How is being an entrepreneur? Do you ever think about how different that makes you?
That in terms of your thinking you're feeling oh, I I do all the time
I guess not so much now. I accept it just observe people who aren't there's so many of them. There's a I
always had the attitude of
Sort of I don't know where I got this from somewhere along the way
I think it almost was back in the years when I was doing some things with Van Tharp and Kay Tharp
Has some programs for traders on the psychology of things and I did some speaking with him for some times and
somewhere along the way I
Decided that the easiest way for me to deal with my entire life in the universe around me was to take
responsibility personally for everything
That happened in my life
Everything even if it was caused by somebody else to figure out how I could
Warp my judgment to the point where I could be responsible for that and if you are responsible for everything and
Then you jump to the next line of thinking that you can then
Take some control of it
And change decisions or change your path or do something different
You can move your whole life
Far afield I started out as a chemical engineer and I ended up as a currency trader by the time I retired
The immediate question everybody
Asks, how the heck did that happen?
Well, you know, it was just one day at a time, but I was responsible for everything in my life
And when I realized that things, you know that it my life at Monsanto is a chemical engineer
We're back in those days every four years or booms and busts and the chemical engineers to be hired
One year and then you know four years later getting laid off. I wanted to have backups
So I needed to trade my portfolio build up my debt worth so I had a backup
So if I did get laid off I could control my own destiny and live a year or two
Well, I'm looking for another chemical engineering position in tough times
One thing leads to another and pretty soon you're trading so much money people notice it and they want you to manage some of their
Money and then you get sucked into the money management business, but you still take responsibility for making that decision to say, okay
I don't want chemical engineering anymore. I'm gonna go be a money manager
That's all within your
Control if you're taking responsibility for everything in your life
And I think that's what entrepreneurs tend to do entrepreneurs
Tend to take control and they realize that they're making it happen. They're not going to wait for somebody to hand it to them
Yeah, my father was always fond of saying that he just didn't want to have a gig where he had to say yes
sir to an a-hole all day long, but
There's always somebody to answer to there's
Which is we had money laundering audits when we were in the currency trading business for the IRS would come in and look at us
All sorts of there's always got to say you got to say yes, sir to them. Otherwise, you're in trouble
Stay for another week just because make your life miserable. Hey Tom, listen, I'm gonna let you run
But I I hope maybe we can do this and again in the future and you know
Maybe months from now if you got some free time and I I have a lot of free time. I'm retired now
I just have to schedule it because as you found out when you tried to schedule me
I'm the busiest retired guy you ever saw. I just finished four days of tournament golf. I I
Have a few weeks here where I'm back in the Scottsdale area
And then I'm heading up to the mountains for fishing and my summer life
So why promise I promise it won't be for a couple months
But I my idea what I was just thinking about this is what maybe we could do is I could say to everybody out
There say listen, I'd like to talk to Tom
You guys ask the questions. Give me a list of questions. I'll will will you know?
Bob wants to ask Tom this question. I think that might be fun, you know
A different perspective than just having to deal with my psychological issues. Who knows what guys usually I've got
Anyway stop I appreciate you being here today and we will hopefully get this posted right away and I'm sure people enjoy it
Yeah, thanks Michael and keep up your great Facebook posts. Thanks Tom. Appreciate it. Talk to soon. See ya


# Chapter 66

Hello Michael. Hey Tom. How are you doing? Great. So I have a lot of questions
Watching them. I've been laughing. Yes, I agree. Oh, he's there
Say you say it saved me today. I didn't have to work that hard
Well, I think we've hit on a new formula for the Michael Koval
Interviews, I think as long as the person you're interviewing is open to a wide range of
Whatever is going to happen. Yeah. Well, you know, I don't necessarily have an order but I figured
And I'm gonna give an introduction earlier
So I don't think we need to keep telling them who you are
I think they're gonna know by the time this is all established
But I I have a quick question that I want to throw at you Tom
You know you you saw you saw a video that
Posted on my site from a philosopher guy named Alan Watts and you kind of
You know by your comment you connected with that the guy that basically the guy that said if you if money was no object
What would you do? How would you?
Manifest your desires. How would you unfold your life?
And I was wondering if maybe you at the beginning of this if you might kind of
Relate and talk to that that little video
Well, it's something I learned probably sometime in my 20s
just now getting to be a lot of years ago and
it comes down to
Somebody asked in the question of
What if you had more money?
What would that get you and you try to answer the question and then you say, okay, what if you got that?
Well, then I would be able to do this and then if you keep going long enough and the person asking the question just keeps
hammering away and say okay, so now let's give you that and what do you have now what?
And what it comes down to is happiness it comes down to you can make a choice
No matter what you lot in life
For people that we've seen that have a smile on their face and they enjoy every day and how many wealthy people have we seen
That are just miserable
And it's it's really a choice that each person has to make that just be happy
So I think that if money was no object, I think
You can it provides a lot of flexibility
It probably provides a little bit better chance at having proper nutrition or better ability to exercise keep your body healthy
There's all those little things but in the end it you can provide happiness as long as you allow it to
Yeah, I think that was a good way to maybe start this off because we have a lot of people that
Really want to ask questions and I've got them all here in front of me like seven or eight pages of questions
about making money essentially through a trend following system or trend following style thinking and I just thought it was important for you to kind of
Put that out there at the beginning because ultimately, you know
You could you're gonna have a lot of answers and give a lot of feedback to people
But I think it's important that maybe they actually know what's important at the very top
Well, and I'll add to what I just got through saying and kind of dovetail it into what you just said
That say you want to be a good trend follower and you become a master at it
so
2030 years go by and you're doing very well and you're managing your own money and
You can still make your life miserable you can
take some of the money and go buy some real estate and complicate your life or you can have you know five divorces or
you can have all sorts of
extraneous things that you that you allow to intrude on your happiness and
So just being a good trend follower doesn't somehow make you happy you can choose to be happy before you become a trend follower
And you can choose to be happy after your successful trend follower. Yeah, I think that's I think it's a great way of saying it
Well, let me jump into some questions because I know no one wants to hear from me. So
So this is from Dan Montauk and it says Tom how do you mr. Serenity
Manage your emotions during a loser any changes today since the book the New Market Wizards
That's a good question Dan he's a smart guy
What I try to do is
Kind of a
Concept in my mind I sort of labeled anchor to the wind if that makes any sense I
What I try to do is when I'm on a super fast winning streak and money is flowing in
almost in record amounts and
I almost can't believe it. I keep trying to force my mind into a place where I remember back
to those
Struggle for four years to get my commodity account to even break even
Or the latest drawdown and how I felt during that drawdown and I what I try to do mentally is bring my
enthusiasm back to neutral and
So the opposite is also true for Daniel. I try to in losing periods
go back and
Remember those times when I was you had every market on the page, you know turn green and
making money hand over fist and that tries to take my
tries to take my depression or my my not my depression, but my
frustration anxiety anything that would go during a drawdown and you're trying to
Remember back to those times when you had everything on your page green and everything making a lot of money and it sort of
Brings you back to neutral again the other way and the goal is is to try to go into each day just
Sort of dead neutral and then try to end each day about the same
It's just another piece of data in a long long stream of thousands of days of trading
over a lifetime that
Are all just data points and you you step back and look at it from that distance
It sort of calms you and it it calms you on the upside and comes you on the downside allows you to just think rationally
Yeah, I'm gonna also offer here to Nick Rosetta had a question
Which is which is basically the same so I'm not gonna ask it
But I at least wanted to give Nick the call out that his question was basically the same as Dan's
So there's a there's a let's see. Where's the there's this one from Bruce stock and says Tom
you know, you conclude most of your Facebook posts with the expression enjoy the ride and
He is asking what drove you to that conclusion and maybe was there a period in your life?
Where was a challenge to enjoy the ride?
Good question. I
Usually put enjoy the ride to remind all those traders out there that
There's no final destination to all of this
I
Mean we all eventually are gonna pass away. We're not gonna be trend followers anymore. We're gonna be dead. I
think you need to take every day and
See the magical things that happen around you and be open to
new ideas and
Observations about the world that exists out there and that's what it's all about. I think
Trying to get to some final destination and putting yourself through hell to get there
When the destination may not be quite what you think it is or might be a little disappointing when reality sets in and
You know you get there and you say well is this all there is
Enjoying the ride is everything to me. I
start each day with you know, I can't wait to attack it and
This morning I was hitting golf balls playing with a new concept for about two hours and ten minutes or so
And just enjoying a beautiful Scottsdale
Morning, and I was the only one on the range. It was very quiet
It was beautiful and that's what enjoying the rides all about. It's not just about training your brains out
It's funny. I had a
Right before we started today. I did a yoga session with a with a teacher and it was about an hour and a half two hours long
And at the very end as I'm laying on my back eyes closed
She basically just read a passage that was almost verbatim for what you just said
it literally just
Almost verbatim the moment of now
Enjoy the journey
And it will all be over at some point in time. So try not to live in the future
Don't live in the past and you got right now
Exactly. What was the second part of that? There was something about enjoy the ride with them. Oh, hold on. Okay, let's see
Okay, his his uh, was there was was there a period in your life where there was a challenge to enjoying the ride
It really stands out
Yes
Probably and that was probably before I understood a lot about myself and probably in my 20s. I was
Working as a chemical engineer. I was
Trying to get an MBA
I was designing a custom home that I was about to build four years later up in the woods southwest of st. Louis. I
was starting up Kennedy capital, which is a stock manager investment advisory firm in st. Louis and I was also trading commodities
that was a
Pretty much wake up in the morning go hard all day and then fall asleep exhausted and get up and do it again
Weekends when I wasn't working as a Monsanto engineer, I would
spend my time doing my research on my commodity account and try to improve what I was doing in stock trading and
My research projects and this is pre microcomputer. So you're doing a lot of stuff with a calculator
You're really running your eyes and and you're not enjoying the ride a lot
But you realize that you're trying to get through it and I think at this stage of life
Both from an energy level my age being 60 and all I think I pace myself a whole lot better
I do take on a lot of things and sometimes find myself
Rushing a little bit but there's always that time in the day where I say okay time to put it away and go
Do something fun?
So I always try to get a little bit of enjoying the ride-ins every day if I can do it
You know, I'm also I'm looking at some of these other questions Fred Penny basically asked a
Psych type question a trading psychology type question that is right in line with what you're saying
And I I just want to try and call people out because some of the questions are very similar
Let me jump into where's the one that I wanted to get to here
I'm gonna go to cut it to the top. So I think this was actually
I'd have been the first was this the first question. I think so. Maybe so
Larry Tintorelli's Larry says, you know, can you ask Tom about his exit strategies on winning positions?
You know a lot of traders know to use stops for losers, but exiting winners can be a bit trickier
So we are I'm gonna jump back into some more fun psych stuff for lack of a better term
But I I thought that might be a good kind of meat of potatoes question to jump into
Okay, Larry the smart trader himself I listened to his podcast and loved it the
The answer to Larry's question is pretty simple
I don't look at a whole lot of difference between a winning trade and a losing trade
I think of it in terms of if the direction is up today. I want to be long
And I want to put a stop
Cell behind that position as long as the direction continues to be up
I'm either keeping the stop where it was or moving it in the direction of up
So I'm moving it up behind the position
When the direction shifts and goes the other way
The stop eventually gets hit and the down direction
Is now in place and I wouldn't want to be in the position anymore
So I try to simplify it down to something that simple. I don't try to
Try to second-guess and say okay. Well this positions, you know, I had 20% and therefore
I should do something different in terms of trying to take the profit or whatever. I just let it run. I remember a very
Famous question of that sakota back. I was listening to a talk. He was giving probably when I was in my 30s
I'm thinking and
the person asked Ed
What's your objective when you get into a trade and?
Ed looked at him and said pretty much the moon when I get into the trade, I'm hoping this thing
Goes long and and I'm gonna be in it the rest of my life and I never have to do another trade
I mean, that's a good answer. There's no reason to think it couldn't
Reality would say that I've never had that happen. Yeah, but
You know, let them run
In this and have a plan if it doesn't run
If it doesn't run that's gonna hit the stop and change direction then with a loss if it runs and then
Falters and changes direction. You're gonna get the stop
and switch to a
You know and have a profit, but it's the same
Exact trade as far as I'm concerned. I don't try to differentiate it
I know some people do and I don't see any reason why you couldn't
Look at that as a research project, but it just never made any sense
psychological to me
You know psychologically if the directions down I don't want to be in it
I don't care whether they have a profit or a loss. I just don't want to be in it
So Clint Stevens and Steve Burns both have question on hedges and I'll read Steve's question here
He says I would like to hear Tom's thoughts on the edge
He has and his trading method by using hedges to decrease losses and downtrends instead of exiting his long positions and
Clint was essentially asking a very similar question on your use of hedges for your edge as well. Okay. Well, that's
Takes a little time, but it's pretty simple
Say you take a any kind of strategy you want whether it be purely technical partially fundamental. I
like to screen
Stocks and ETFs based on a little bit of fundamentals if I'm looking for a high dividend
You know yield would be a factor you could screen positions on for instance
Valuations like PE ratios and things like that. I'd rather pay something a little bit cheaper than buy something extremely pricey
That being said, let's say I'm smart enough to put together a diversified portfolio of longs
Let's say we do that
last September
Just for the sake of argument here. I
Just happened to look as I was closing down my market stuff just before you called
My equity in my stock portfolio, which has been hedged quite a lot of the last few months
Is exactly the same as it was in mid-September hasn't gone up or down a nickel
But what has happened
is I put hedges on every time a down direction occurs and
I've taken them off every time an up direction occurs
all right and
What happens is time is clicking by on all those wonderful positions. I put in place
So you're getting closer to long-term capital gains, which I can use for charitable
Contributions or I can get a better tax rate on
Meanwhile on my hedges, I'm short selling the SPY ETFs
Which is very very liquid. I can short any time. I wish I can take off any time. I wish
you know trades sometimes like 30 times a second and
What you're doing is buffering your portfolio with the SPY's at the same time that your long positions have the ability
To over the long run become a long-term capital gain and to allow their
Alpha if you've done your job, right picking them to
Sort of go through every up and down and show that they can do something for you
So that's where the edge comes in you have a long-term gain and the taxes there against the short-term nature of the hedges
Let me go ahead and jump in was we got a long we got a long list here. So I
Did really block off the afternoon just in case. Oh, wow
I'm still sitting here as a sweaty mess from yoga, too
So this is from
Yeah, they don't want to look at me right now, that's for sure
Once I get to the point I can do handstands
I am gonna try and do some of these while I'm in a handstand and so maybe I can ask questions
I've never really tried to read upside down, but I will try
So that that'll be something new for another another new year podcast for there we go
I will be somewhere in Thailand because I'm going to Asia February 1st
I don't know for how long or whatever but so maybe somewhere in Thailand and a really good scenic view
I can get upside down into a Skype call with you video sometime in the new year Tom. That'd be really fun
So anyways, this is from Brandon Bruckman and
Andreas sis also asked a very similar question about
Says Tom during the strategy development and testing process what metrics gave you confidence in your system
And what process did you follow in taking a developed system from testing to live trading? I think it's probably
Wow, okay. It's not a short answer. I know I know some of these are a little bit more
They're good and they're good questions, but they require a little bit of history and kind of blocking through the process
When we came up with a concept at trend stat in the day
We were trying to figure out whether it added value or not. There was a number of different things we did
First of all, we
had a set database of
cleaned up data that we went through and painstakingly made sure there was no anomalies like for instance a
Close or an open that was outside the high-low range is an obvious one that you find in databases all the time
And that can't happen if you got an open in the close. It's got to be within the high-low range
Or something's wrong
So we did the cleaned up data and we would go through and take the concept and program the actual indicator
That says buy here sell there or do whatever, you know, the indicators trying to do
Then we would try to have some metrics. We primarily looked at
Largest drawdown average drawdown
time to recoveries and we looked a lot at return to risk ratios and we measure risk by
return to
Drawdown we measure at return to volatility of the returns
those types of things and
All of that is great, but I can tell you that
In reality the thing that helped me the most feel comfortable with any kind of new indicator
Was when I'm going to my office
Tell my secretary Lisa to I'm shutting the door and I'm going to be going down this
Research result and unless it's an emergency don't bother me and I would take a ruler
and I would
Start with page one put the ruler on there
And I would read what the market did that day and I would read what the results from the strategy were that day
And I would ask myself this one question
Did that strategy perform that day like you would have expected it given the type of market?
that you had that day and
It's very important to understand it to that level
I think because in the end that's what causes trend followers or any traders for that matter systems traders primarily
to
Let go of their system and abandon it when it's having a rough two weeks or a month or six months or a year
I know one of the questions was what do you do and I when your strategy is not working well
to me as long as
If you looked at the data of them the last couple months in market
Let's say and you said based on the strategy and the way I set my strategy up
I would have expected my strategy to have a difficult period in the last couple months
Well, then it's not broken. Don't fix it
Just let it keep going. Let wait for the good times good times are somewhere in the future. Probably I
Think a lot of people take a drawdown as it's not working anymore
None of my strategies. Maybe there's ways of doing this
I none of my strategies including when I had all of them together and add them together
Ever got to the point where I never had a losing day
They're always gonna have losing days
So when I looked at it, I said geez, you know as long as if I'm having a choppy sideways market
And I've got a trend following model
That's getting chopped up a little bit in the sideways market. Well, that's what I would expect
Let's wait until the next trending market and I'll be fine
And I think that's really I got that level of knowledge by going through day after day after day
And I would just sit there with I'm talking sick pieces of computer paper and just take a ruler and go down the page
and look at every day's and date I'm taking the hours, but when I got to that level and I thought I
Understand it. It's working. I understand exactly how it's gonna react to a lot of different things and
The metrics look okay
Let's let's go turn it on and put some real money with it
Well, let me let me throw in as a follow-up here
Jim Byers and you were just mentioning drawdown and
How it really can't be avoided and so Jim asked the Prussian question
He says he wants to know if you can describe what you learn from your earliest large drawdown
Yeah, that was an easy one to remember
It was a silver trade. I
Think it was documented maybe in the market was its interview. I can't remember now
but I I was merely going along my way and I
put on a couple of I
Think my portfolio had gotten up in my futures portfolio was about a couple hundred thousand or something like that hundred thousand maybe
And I got into a couple different silver contracts and this was the time when hunts were trying to corner silver
I didn't know it at the time, but it turned out to be that time
So silver went through the roof
And it exceeded any
Expectation I would ever have but being the good trend follower I was at that point
I was going to hold on for dear life and and just go up and down and whichever way the market went
I was just going to keep moving my stops as the stops could be justified my stops got pretty far away
Because the market was going so fast upward
And at one point I noticed that my equity in this little hundred thousand dollar futures account had gotten to something like
600,000 or 500,000 something like ridiculous. I had made four or five hundred percent. I'm still hanging on to the same exact positions
That's when the major drawdown occurred. I got out of the position and I that my
portfolio ended up
Probably about a quarter of a million or three hundred thousand or something. I had lost two hundred three hundred thousand just
in a matter of weeks when they broke apart the corner and
reduced their increase in margins and the whole thing just fell apart and went limit down now day after day after day and
What I learned from that
was that
volatility as a percent of the equity in my portfolio need not change
What I mean by that?
Is I had several different silver contracts
There was no reason why I couldn't stay with that silver trade and be a good trend follower and write it to the bitter end
But I didn't need to hold the same number of contracts at the end as I had when I started out. I
Could peel off contracts as I went so that it reduces the volatility to the portfolio
But still gave me a significant silver position
That way the portfolio acts more like a portfolio instead of
15 things in a silver position
Where the silver position drives the whole portfolio up or down every day and the rest of them doesn't make a difference at all
By by volatility adjusting my positions on an ongoing basis and I did it with the computers at trend stat every day
we we could take
80 different commodity markets traded by multiple different systems and
The computers could just tell us where the volatility of equity that per equity of every single position
Should be so that all of the portfolios acted like portfolios and no one market could really dominate too much
What was going on that day?
And that's what I learned from it. It was a very valuable lesson
that sort of expounded very expanded into
Risk controls as a percent of equity margin as a percent of equity and by the you know
The end of trend set we had lots of different ways of trying to control position sizing and make that position sizing
The bottom line of the position sizing was so that every position had a meaningful
impact on the portfolio not a small amount not a large amount a meaningful amount
And when you get to that level then you're truly, you know managing the portfolio
You know, I was going to ask I'm gonna come back to it. Uh, Clint Stevens has a question where he was talking about
Returns plus serenity versus just going only for returns. I'm going to jump back to that, but I want to
Eric Spineman and Rudy with jaja both have questions that revolve around your use of money management
The types of money management how you approach risk control and whether you pyramid at all
And so both both of those guys had a similar question there. All right. Well, uh, I viewed money management
Easy calculation take the risk to your stop loss of where you are at any point in time
multiply it times the number of contracts
That's your dollar of risk
in that position divided by the
Equity in your portfolio
And that's the percent of your portfolio that's at risk at that point due to that one position
You could do the same thing with volatility. You take the volatility of any one position times the number of contracts
Volatility for me was the average true range
of over the last 20 days
Divide it by the equity get a margin or volatility as a percent of equity
Margin you can do the same thing how much margin per position times the number of contracts divided by the equity you have margin for equity
You can set fixed levels for every one of those three things
and by doing so
You can do a calculation where the computer says if I exceed the limits on any of these
I'm going to sell off enough positions to get me back down underneath all of those limits
And I even went to the point where I had initial position limits and I had
ongoing
Existing position limits because when a position becomes profitable and starts running
It's by its very nature going to take on a little extra volatility a little extra risk
But you've got a winning position now and it's going your way. You want to let it run
So we found that we we came up with a level for initial position risk and initial
Volatility risk as a percent of equity and sized our portfolios
Then as the markets would run our way, we would allow it a little more room
As it got above those levels, we would just start stripping off
Contracts until we got back to the point where it was
in the limits
And yet we would always let our positions run as it's good. It would say to the moon
Well, I keep jumping here. We got lots of stuff to cover
Whenever one of the questions answered
So it's okay. So uh ross ross hindrix and matthew fry both have questions
about
System testing and ross coming. It looks like from a beginning standpoint is really saying
What kind of advice could you give to the first time?
Uh programmer looking to perhaps back test for the first time and matthew's taking it a step further and he's saying
Do you believe in walk walking a system forward?
If not, what metrics are best used to monitor the health of your edge?
And how do you know when you might make a change?
So ross is really asking how do I get started as a beginner and perhaps programming my system and matthew's saying
You know, I want some comment on walking a system forward and how do you know when a change might be needed?
Good questions. All
Starting out. I had I guess the good fortune in my case to be a chemical engineer
So I took four train programming and basic programming and understood what a
A program was all about. Uh, I was not born with the knowledge of programming. I would point out
Uh, and I don't think any of the people on the facebook page were born with the knowledge of programming
But these are learned skills. You can buy books on it. You can take classes in it
Uh, I would recommend when you're starting out
Take a good look at some something as simple as an excel spreadsheet for a lot of things
That I do anymore since I don't have
Uh full-time programming staff at trend stat being in retirement and all
A lot of the stuff I do nowadays. I just do on the excel spreadsheets. They've gotten so powerful
And so capable. I mean with the gigabytes of hard drive that we have on our computers and on the
The height processing speeds that we have
You can do an awfully a lot of stuff
on an excel spreadsheet
Today that I could not even program in basic back on my you know, ibm pc back in the old days or my trash 80
Back in what was it? 1980 probably
The computers are pretty powerful on a small basis. So, uh,
Consider the excel spreadsheet maybe start there
You can see what's going on a little easier
If you want to try to get a little fancy inside of excel spreadsheets, they allow
a little visual basic
type of
Modules that you can install in there to do fancier things
There's lots of courses and books available and that type of stuff. That's probably where i'd start a lot of the canned
strategy programs
Can give you
sort of
tools to look at some things
My worry is is that a lot of those tend to not be geared
To exactly the way you're going to end up trading. So it's giving you a little bit of a
Not a realistic view of what it is that you're about to embark on
and
What I mean by that is sometimes these can programs don't have the same position sizing that you're going to have
So they might be based on one contract and the one contract is always one contract
and so you get the results of one contract, but you don't get the effective money management in there and all that so you get a
sort of a weird
Look at history and you might become tainted good or bad
by that and when you're in when you're looking at
History you want to become comfortable with your strategy
Versus various types of markets. You do not want to get
to the point where you just fall in love with some strategy based on some simulation that was
Not even done in a rigorous fashion
And then all of a sudden it's falling apart in the future and you don't have that comfort level that you need to stick it out
That's how I would start out and on the walking forward question
Walking forward to me is a term that describes for those who haven't run into the term before
Sort of taking a section of time
Running a strategy and then coming out with the results of that strategy and using that particular database
To re-optimize somehow your parameters and then you're going to go attack the next part of the database
And see what its results are and then use that second section of data
To optimize the parameters and then you're going to walk that forward to the third chunk of data and so on
I thought that seemed
A bit clunky in that that's not the way real world works. I don't
You know to me every day was another day and I wanted to just continue to have things
If things need to change for instance example true range
Average true range over 20 day changes every day
So if you want to think about it if you have average true range as one is your one of your parameters
It's walking forward every day and day after day. You're getting a new 20 day period a new average true range and things are changing
each day
So you're walking it forward
Based on that and that's more that's more close to what you actually do in trading every day
So I like that type of strategy better than blocking off large sections of data
And optimizing that section and then using it on the next chunk of data
So I would encourage people if you want to think of it as walking forward every day
That's fine with me
uh, you can certainly do that with your historical databases by
calculating the average true range of every 20 day period and then you just start going through the database and
Make your decisions and make your money management calls and let the databases keep track of it all and
You're in good shape
so I got a question here from andrew derbyshire and essentially what he's asking as you
Started to
excel in the world of trend following and of course the the vast majority of market participants are
Are still in a in orientation that's more maybe value or fundamentals or buy and hold
Is that if you would get the skeptics and he references something that I did on a podcast where I combined four interviews
that david harding gave on cnbc
and I offered some comments and
During those interviews. They really didn't seem to really get what harding did
Uh, even though you would think they might have done a little homework before they had them on but on four separate occasions
But one of the occasions and i'm not saying this to kind of like say anything negative about somebody
But on one of the occasions joe kernan of cnbc
was essentially, uh
Implying or making reference that uh that trend following or what david harding did
Was very analogous to long-term capital management. And so I guess what andrew is asking about is is is skeptics
And how you might have handled skeptics in the past and perhaps even skepticism towards trend following that for example
How harding was having to handle that on cnbc?
Uh, that's a good question too
And we certainly had our skeptics and they still exist out there
Probably that's one of the reasons why it still works so well if everybody believed in it, it probably wouldn't work so well
Yeah, I I think what?
I ended up having to do in the later stages of my career. I did some studies that
looked at
Where did churn followers make money and where did they lose it?
I came up with the concept of taking the monthly returns
On an assorted portfolio of 20 or 30 different commodities
and I measured
The amount of absolute change in direction in any one market
And then I put that against the profits that cta's got
during those periods
And I did this first with our own trendset portfolios because I had the detail of market by market by market
I did it later on a macro basis by saying what were the average prices of a whole portfolio of things?
High or low and what were the profits from cta industry high or low?
And we found a definite correlation that when markets move cta's make money or trend followers make money. I think that
That should be very logical. I don't see why anybody could disagree with it
I don't see why anybody would think that wouldn't work
So then the question becomes are you going to have market movement or are markets just going to sit in one place for the next?
20 years if you knew that markets were not going to go anywhere for 20 years
I don't think you probably want to be a trend follower
You probably don't want to be a trader
You can't make much money if the market isn't going to move anything because you've got to buy one price and sell it
A higher price or sell at a higher price and buy at a lower price
But if the market doesn't move at all, you aren't going to get a higher or lower price. You're going to get the same price
Seems to me markets have to move and it seems to me also over my lifetime thanks to computers and
Lots more participation in the markets and so on all the forces that come together
There's been more volatility rather than less
So there's more potential for things to explode to ridiculously high levels. You've got now
The currency being somewhat evaluated with with all this qe nonsense. I think that i'm dead against
If the dollar keeps getting more and more worthless and things like crude oil are based on dollar
Then you know
people in the middle east or wherever are going to want more dollars for the same amount of oil that they're selling us and
It seems to me we're going to end up paying it sooner or later
Therefore you've got this bias for things to go outside the range that they've ever been in before
uh, just because the currency that it's based on is
It's kind of going outside of where it's been before as well
Given all that it seems to me that that's where
trend followers like david harding are going to just over time continue to make money and why
people like cnbc and and uh some of the people on the
the interview shows
Who spend their whole day?
You've got to realize in front of the cameras talking about what is happening up on this ticker board
That's behind them or in front of them
And they they can't see the forest for the trees that they're looking at the noise all day long
And then trying to ask david harding a guy who's thinking in terms of lifetimes
Uh a question which he answers very eloquently
And they don't get it because they can't see beside
You know, they're looking at the last five minutes of what the dow did or whatever. It's
I think that's where the disconnect becomes and
and in terms of
Where I see the edge for trend followers is simply
My bias that I think there will be more volatility in the future rather than less
And I think there's going to be a lot more big moves in the future than less
And you have to put up with the nonsense in between as you were talking about some of the talking heads and the news shows I
I've had one. I mean I've had a lot of interesting experiences, but I one interesting experience comes to mind
Was being invited to cnbc
Uh to speak with producers to have them
Unbeknownst to me at the time. They wanted me to pitch them a show on the spot
And I remember walking through that studio and it was so interesting because there's this big bull plan area of all these reporters
You know the people that you see on tv, you know
They go back to their computers and they start typing away doing whatever and then over off to the side is the is is the set
So, you know as as a viewer you're sitting there and you see this this nice little tv, uh window of what's going on
But as an as when you're inside the studio and you look at it, you realize wow
this is all uh
To steal from your background a little bit. This is all very engineered. This is all very fake
This is it real and if you can if you stand there and you see it in live
In living color. It's much different than flipping on the tv and seeing what they want you to see within the confines of the borders
of your screen
It's quite a lot and a lot of it's just geared to talking about noise
Yeah
Anybody tuning in want to hear something from david harding on a strategy that require a tremendous amount of work to put together
You know cover the next you know decade or something
instead of
I want to know why the dials down 50 points today, right? Why aren't they going to get to that?
That's what I want to know, right, you know, so that's kind of the average joe just doesn't get it and
Uh, you know, I wouldn't think cnbc would be a place where professional traders would go for ideas
Except maybe
What to do the opposite of or something? I guess maybe if they see an interview with david harding and they've never
Heard those types of answers and and that type of thought process
Maybe they're like well, maybe I better find out who this guy is and what he does and maybe I can learn something
Yeah, but they would require you having enough knowledge to
Separate the good pieces of information david from the bad pieces of information, which would be you know
The announcers that are asking him the questions. Yeah, uh, touche touche
If you knew that you probably didn't need to go
Right David, aren't they? Exactly. There you go. That's that's catch 22, huh?
so
So I have a question here from uh, clint stevens and clint says uh, you know in jack schwager's book in the market wizards book
It suggests that you were not included in the book on a return basis alone
But for this combination of quote serenity a nice way of life plus returns. So clint wants to know
Your development of your trading approach and how you run your life from the ground up
Was the notion of serenity and not being a crazed, you know, overweight overworked
Trader sitting there non-stop no life. Was that thought of from the very beginning?
As you were as you were
Gonna lay out a life in front of you
Yes, it was uh to a large extent the
It's slightly different than you would expect though, um in that
my view
I think we might have been covered this last interview briefly
My view of my job as a money manager was to manage client assets. It wasn't to manage my assets
So when I talk to clients and I ask them what they like and what they don't like and I listen to client complaints
Over the years about how i'm firing you because of this why you know one two three four five, whatever
You learn as a money manager that really the average client out there
Sadly does not allow
their
Money manager that they hired to do what that money manager is capable of
because if you do
And you go up and down too much. It makes the clients nervous. They fire you
And they always want to chase after the returns and give you the money when it's high on your equity curve
And when your equity curve has gone through a drawdown, they want to pull it out
So it's very self-defeating from the standpoint of performance fees
It's very self-defeating from the standpoint of clients making actual returns on investments
It comes down to something. I determined very early on in the process that it was
My job to try to make the clients as good a client
as I could
So that they would allow me to be the best money manager I could be
When you do that you start designing your strategies around the client not around you
Now because clients had a lot less risk tolerance than I did
It indirectly fed into my quality of life because I created strategies that were a lot tamer that had a lot less
variation I attempted to try to stick to
Return to risk ratios that were good and and sort of boring and and the reason jack when he looked at my stuff
He kept having people say you should really interview tom. He's a very interesting guy
And jack being the caffeinated new yorker at the time working for prudential based futures and director of research. I believe
he
You know, you got to picture yourself and in his position
He's looking for the sizzle that'll sell the market wizards books and trying to find all these guys that have created, you know
quadruple hundreds thousands percent returns and
our legends on the street
That sells books and my story isn't that compelling it's an engineer that turns into a money manager who's
Got some kind of tame returns and just kind of cruises along so from a surface outside
Which act didn't seem much there of interest, but when people kept telling him over and over again
He needed to interview me. He kept getting kind of puzzled over what the heck is everybody think that's so, you know
interesting about tom
and when he got done
interviewing me and
Found out how I designed everything to have a life and that I had a really fun life
And he realized sort of wistfully I think that he hadn't figured out how to do that for himself yet
I think he
Sort of indicated to me that out of all of the two books that he wrote on the market wizards up to that point
My style of trading probably in the end would be something he would be most interested in following
Versus all the others because it led to sort of a peacefulness and a
Control of the trading process to the point where there wasn't a lot of angst
And I think jack originally came to trading thinking there has to be stress
There has to be you know
It's a much machmo macho type of endeavor and you got to go for big returns and you got to suck it up and you
got to
You know ride the equity curve do all these things you got to do and it was all
Nonsense really it just his own biases led to that and I kind of opened up his eyes to another world
You know, i'm going to add uh completely unrelated
But I think it's kind of a lifestyle choice that I saw someone in my family make
And this would be my father and my father is a dentist and he decided even in his 20s before he had any
Practices speak up before he had any real grand revenue coming in the door or anything
He decided as a very young man that he was going to work a four day work week and he's taken off friday
every
Every week and that that he built that into his system so to speak as a young man
So I think there are ways
You know techniques and and ideas that we can think about doing things differently and I get back to the uh
To the alan watts video that I discussed at the very beginning
The guy that was bringing a lot of eastern thoughts to the western world, which is you know
How can you structure your life differently and and think about it early on don't just get stuck on the treadmill
Exactly and to finish the answer to the question. Let's say he continued on and said how has that evolved?
Well now i'm in retirement. Now trend stats no longer there. I don't have a staff of 10. I don't have 40 computers
I have one
PC that I pretty much do most of my work on and we're talking on another pc pc right now
I have to think to myself. All right, let's see now. I don't have the staff
I don't have the backups, but I need to create good trading strategy
So I morphed into a different style of trading and different markets that I trade now
Some of which are due to like I never traded orange juice at trend set because we were too big
But now I can trade orange juice. So I trade orange juice. I only have one contract on this big deal
and
So you you adjust with the conditions that exist at the time and what do I want out of retirement?
Well, I want to be able to go hit some golf balls today for two hours. Plus
I don't want to be tied to sitting here in front of the computer all day
and
You know looking at charts and ruining my eyes. I hate you know, i'd rather go out and prune trees in the backyard and
you plant some flowers and
Go work out and go for a hike and go play golf and all these other things that I like to do
so
Why if i'm going to
To create a trading strategy and I have I know the amount of money i'm going to try to deal with I know my skill level
I know my resources of what kind of computers I have what kind of software I have
And I know what kind of market data i'm getting in
Why don't I design something that works for my lifestyle?
So that my lifestyle is exactly what I want it to be and yet I can still apply good trading strategy in principles to to my trading
And I think that's simple to do if you just start from the question
How do I want my trading strategy to operate and then fit with my lifestyle?
I've often said if you're a traveling salesman, you're on the road five days a week and your home on weekends
Why not do a saturday morning trading style where you take once a week data?
You look at it saturday morning. You make your decisions you
Send them in electronically and then you go on the road sunday night again
Yeah, I mean it's I think it's surprising. It's actually been surprising me in the last couple years. How many
Uh large funds large trend following funds, uh use weekly bar systems
Absolutely, it gives you a different angle and you know when you're a very large cta
I think one of the reasons why some of them are are struggling is the dollars that they're managing is just so huge
They affect the market when they go in and out
So they have to start getting in or out over two three days and going to weekly charts and doing all sorts of things
As long as you do the rest of the work on risk control and portfolio diversification and other things
There's no reason to think you can't be successful
Might change your return stream or you turn to risk profile a little bit
But that's what these big guys have to do because they just cannot afford to make any trade
That is not an essential trade because they just can't they got too much money and
It's hard as a cta when you got a lot of different forces trying to shove money at you
And your employees trying to you know
Make a career of being in the business and you're trying to expand and go into new markets and all those things
It's really hard to turn down money coming in you have to really set some
Of your own personal levels and say no
This is going to be a hundred million and we're going to shut it down at a hundred million
And if it gets above a hundred million, we're going to start sending money back to you all
A lot of ctas have done that but it really does give an indication that you're kind of
choking on the amount of money that you're managing and so
You know allocators that are giving you the money are starting to thank jesus guys sending money back
That means he's really struggling to try to get the money invested or maybe they say he's being
He's being true to us and and not
diluting our returns by trading once a week and something so
he has two sides of the story, but it's something that brings up a sort of a
spotlight on that trader and
He has to be able to withstand the scrutiny and explain why he's sending money back
But some people just don't and then the returns sort of get diluted over time
Yeah, you bring up a good point. Maybe not necessarily where you were going, but it made me think about the idea
that
The idea of the trading strategy and then the money management business in one of the things that i've done in my books
To some degree there's a there's a positive to this and then there's a negative but it's great to show the
Validity of a trading strategy by looking at all these different traders that have these historical track records
And you can say well look look at how this has performed over many many decades
And that's fantastic, but your point also
When you start to talk about the money under management and and assets and the money management business frankly
I don't think most people most not that you were doing this on, you know, you weren't doing this on purpose
But I think most people
Uh just they really want to know about the trading strategy
I think some sometimes what happens is is that the money management gets blended into the
To the two of them and like here you describe your life today. Your life today is a
Is one man no staff and a nice life
And I I think sometimes, you know, when when when I receive questions from people they want to talk about well
Did you see this? I mean, for example, john w henry recently closing down his shop, you know for me
It's hard to criticize a man who was in this space for 30 years
Very successful had survived survived huge assets under management
And you know then he decides he wants to go to another business
Completely unrelated makes a fortune in that and then is it surprising necessarily that he
That he maybe doesn't have every ball in the world bouncing up in multiple fortune 500 businesses
So I I think it's sometimes you just need to step back a little bit for perspective on this kind of thing
Yeah, you do you really do and I think john henry is a good example
I mean he ran a little bit more leverage than than I would have run
Uh, so he had a little bit more up and down
But you know, he was able to continue to attract attention and uh and had enough marketing capability or sales capability that it
He was able to keep the business running for a long long time
Hats off to him for doing it and yeah, I think in the end, uh
Everybody should consider what what does john henry want to do with his date? Does he want to you know manage?
A futures trading firm that he doesn't have a whole lot of interest in it's just a big liability and he's got a very deep pocket
so
Why uh put yourself through that liability?
Yeah, I mean and I think that's it's it's if people think about it
It's not necessarily surprising if just like you you've made this transition and it's almost I knew this years ago
I mean the moment john bought the team you say well, you know, he's obviously he's he's interested in other stuff, too
And it's it's kind of hard to be interested in two very big things like that in one in one lifetime. Uh, but uh, yeah, um
So there knows he may be uh, looking at something else completely different that we don't even know about
And you have to salute that you just have to and once again the moment of now and you adjust to the situation and
I just think it's a fantastic story. I so I you know, look
Well, you and I both know that there's a lot of armchair quarter packs that that sit out there on the sidelines
Drake at a budweiser, uh, you know 50 pounds over rate watching the football game throwing out criticism
But you know you got to give you got to give props to the guy who's in the game and he's sweating away
And he's making it happen. I have to salute that 100 percent. Sure
So larry has another question that I thought was great too. And uh, so you've got a coin flip
Uh entry method experiment that you've done and and larry wanted you to kind of reiterate that because he thought it really
Uh the concept behind it because what it does is it focuses people less on entries
Which is the favorite thing for most traders when they're getting started like, you know
Where do I get in and it puts more emphasis on the exit and proper money management?
Right. Uh, usually when novice traders start out the biggest thing is to read a book on trading or you know, they read
trend filing manifesto or something they find out a lot about
What is the moving average and what is an exponential moving average and what is a range breakout system?
And what is pointing to your charting and non-nonon?
And they get sucked into this buying and selling and a lot of times with one contract
Because that keeps the math simple and you can put it on a spreadsheet and off you go and you try different things and
You find something that you think works and off you
Off you magically go and hope that you're successful
Along the way, of course, I had my lessons that i'd learned on money management started driving home the point in spades that
Uh money management was far more important than the buying and selling stuff
But everybody that would want to interview me as a potential money manager would want to know about my trading strategy
Not about my money management
They always wanted I mean the clients want to know more about what you're doing
And I thought you know what I had I need to do
Is to once and for all shut up people about this nonsense of it's all about the trading strategy
And it's not about the money management
So I developed a strategy where I took uh our cleaned up databases and I think I at the time I did it with
Uh, I did it with I think five or six markets
Maybe seven markets something like that. I can't remember not spend so long
But it was replicated by some guys in austria with about 30 markets
same conclusion
In my study. I just said, okay, let's flip a coin random number generator
At the end of the day if we don't have a position
If it's heads you buy if it's tails you sell
As soon as that position is put in place
You take a simple range breakout strategy
And if it's a sell I put in a buy stop if it's a buy I put in a sell stop
I move it
In the same direction as the trade goes. So you're truly just letting the trade run as long as you can until it hits the stop
And then you flip the coin again
What I found when I did that
was
over any
Run that I did
Because it's random number generator creating say your buy and sell decisions are completely random and completely different every time you run it through
So we we ran it a hundred times
And got different results every time but the propensity over time
Over lots and lots of runs was that it slightly made money not a lot, but it made money
and the key to it was
Balancing the portfolio was perfect each one of the seven positions had a meaningful impact on the portfolio
There wasn't one that was dominating or one that was dominating good or one dominating bad
They were meaningful and all of the risk control
Was there with volatility control all of the we had money we had the
Risk as a percent of equity limits that we had all the number of contracts and perfectly balanced
That's what creates the the profits the buying and selling don't make that much you can use a coin flip
And still make money the guys in austria by the way that ran it on
20 or 30 markets I forget now
They actually made more money per year than I do with my coin flip because I only had seven markets
They might have been running a little bit more
portfolio heat
Uh in the in the end, but they were actually they had made money, too
Well tom, we're on the second. We're on the second half at least here
There's only so many more in front of us. So I will I will only keep you from the links for so much longer
Oh, i'm all i'm all done with the links for today. Okay, okay
Um, so, uh, this is a question from uh guru prasad
Guru prasad, I am not going to pronounce your last name because I will only butcher it. Um, so
Uh, but he's he's got a real simple question here
Within a larger question. He really wants to know about percent betting
He's talking about he feels comfortable at one percent
And I think he would really like to hear your your view on
percent
Of capital bet on each trade and maybe how you view that choice of percent bet
Yeah, this is where I think it'd be very important for each trader to
Do his own simulations on percents
We had limits as I already said on things like margin to equity volatility equity risk to equity
And we had those specific numbers that we had come to based on
simulating how various
leverages
Feed back into return streams and how much can the portfolio go up and down in a particular day week month year?
Uh, what kind of matching drawdowns do you tend to get out of different?
Portfolio heat levels and how much leverage and so he's very perceptive one percent
Is an area where probably we ran trend set quite a bit in some cases some markets we were down in the
less than one percent, um
very rarely where we were above it and we
pretty much
On ongoing trade risks we're up in the more like two percent ranges and stuff like that because you got a position that was now
Moving your direction your stops are now been moved
And you're starting to get to the point where you're going to start letting it run as far as you can and
A little more risk is fine
Excessive risk then is not fine. I think that's a question that each trader needs to
handle for himself
And an important thing to note is now that i'm in retirement and I have my wife and myself as our sole two clients
And she's happy with what i'm doing
Um, I can run the portfolio especially in my futures portfolio a little bit higher than one percent and feel very comfortable with it
Because I know what i'm doing
I know it's going to go up and down a little bit more but I know i've controlled the amount of risk that i've got
And that makes trading it a little bit faster. Not a big deal to me
You just want you want people to see what the range of possibilities are?
Correct you each trader should really try
To simulate some trading ideas at different levels and try to dial it in
If anything a little lower than you think you can tolerate because when the heat of the battle and you're in that big major
Drawdown that you've never had before
Having less of a drawdown will be better than having more of a drawdown
You want to kind of err on the conservative side on the number
So if you can do your simulations and it comes out well, I think I can do two percent
Maybe do one and a half percent just for
For a while at least and see if you uh, you think that's okay
You don't need to be rushing out and trading 10 of your equity out of position
Giuseppe Luizo
I hope I pronounced that right on the back end there has a very straightforward and basic question which has got a lot of weight behind it
How do you diversify your portfolio tom?
Uh, that's a tough one, uh more and more in today's world because globally we've gotten into so much electronic data
So many computers trading so many different markets. It was very easy for trendstat to manage
Something like 30 currency forex markets something like 80 futures markets and about 25 mutual funds that we traded
And to do it with 10 people four of those people were doing development work
They weren't managing it only two were involved in the actual production of orders and running of the trades
So two people are handling
hundreds of clients across
hundreds of different
Positions by scores of different strategies and it it's easy to do every day and I don't know
I think the afternoon runs would take
Maybe 10 minutes in the case of currencies and then we'd run the rest of it
In maybe 15 minutes
It wouldn't take that long at all
and I think um
I think diversification is harder and harder to come by because
in any one day
Let's say you take a soybean contract and you take a gold contract
Well theoretically those two shouldn't have a whole lot to do with each other
So gold could go up and soybeans could go up gold could go up soybeans could go down
On and on all different possibilities
So you would hope that by having a soybean and a gold in your portfolio
You would have some diversification, but what's
Happened historically more and more
And it's always during times of major
News announcements wars breaking out collapse of this or bubble bursting or whatever
You get these what I call lockstep periods where every market
moves
in a direction
That's either a hundred percent correlated with another market or a hundred percent inversely correlated with another market
And nothing in between they are no longer independent
You'll you look at your portfolio on a day when this major thing happens and all of a sudden you've got
Uh your entire screen is green every position in your portfolio is green. You're making money across the board the very next day
A shift happens and everything is red
You're at a hundred percent lockstep
You've got no diversification
You think you do but you don't the other situation I see a lot in the novice portfolios
They'll come in and say well, give me a look at my portfolio. Okay, fine. It's some relative. It's a friend
Whatever and i'm looking at their
Their portfolio and they've been sold by their broker or financial planner on numerous different
Growth stock mutual funds. I remember my sister had a portfolio. She showed me and they had five different
Mutual funds in their portfolio three of which weren't just big old growth stock mutual funds
I said well, you know, you don't have any diversification
They're all going to go up when the market goes up. They're all going to go down when the market goes down
You're going to buy and hold them. That's not diversification. Well, I have three different ones
Well, you know that does that give me a diversification?
The answer to it is a difficult one
You're trying to grind through all the different markets and how they trade against other markets over a time period
But in the back of your mind, you're also trying to say to yourself
When times of crisis exist and lockstep sets in on these markets. I better have my risk control
Schemes in place to limit my exposure
both good and bad
Unfortunately because I don't want the bad part of it
To uh to reside in my portfolio, but when I know that no matter what I do
I'm going to get zero diversification in the world because markets are just so inter-correlated these days
so chris may asks
The sarcastic where is gold going in the next six months?
I thought that was cute. Um, I think i've got i'm down to three the final three and then we'll
I appreciate all your time today and i'll i'll let you run but i've got three left here
I've been as i've been doing this if everyone's wondering i've had like
Literally 15 pieces of paper in front of me trying to eliminate redundancies combine people
And there's a couple questions that just aren't going to get asked
I'm, sorry a couple of you guys did not really think through a couple of these and they're not getting asked. Okay
Um, so so this is from fred penny
And he this is a good question. He says
What would cause you to stop trading a particular system?
And then what might cause you to start trading that same system again?
All right
What would cause me to stop trading a strategy would be the day that I realized that in market conditions that existed?
Uh in the recent history
The results I got from that trading strategy were different than I would have expected
Given the way that strategy
Had gone through those markets
something
Happened that I did not expect that's why
I I am so big on going through those day by day with the ruler concept
In the simulations. I needed to understand everything that happened and how that strategy worked
And how it reacted to various types of movements
So that as i'm going through life and i'm looking at the last two weeks or three weeks or four weeks
And i'm seeing a let's say a market that's going one direction
And i'm a trend follower and i'm looking at this thing and it's not making any money. Why is not making money something's wrong
That's what would cause me to
To stop trading a strategy and take a good look at it
if I could find
Why it was doing that and where I was wrong on my construction of the strategy
somehow
And feel comfortable making some change to it that would
uh
solve that problem
Then I would be immediately willing to start it up again
If you know went through the simulations and went through the line by line
Look on it and said, you know, this is ready for prime time. Let's get back into it
If I couldn't find why it
Was doing what it was
You know what was creating that anomaly, uh between what I pictured to be the way it would act and the way it really act
acted, uh, then I would
I would just dismiss it it would go to the uh junk heap and i'd move on with something new
so this is a you know, as you mentioned that i'm kind of curious though because
your
Your background the engineering background, uh, very analytical. Was there ever a side of you that?
Um, or did you just naturally adapt to it because of your upbringing training whatnot where the uncertainty
That is always inherent in a strategy, especially these types of strategies the uncertainty that
That you are comfortable with that that range of possibilities comfortable with that uncertainty whereas
So many people just want this they they want to believe that when they when they line up with their system to trade
They're going to get one percent a month every month
and so the fact that you you you really
I think anybody that starts to understand this world this way of thinking has to really find peace with uncertainty
Yeah, I think the way to do it is to look at daily returns or some large amounts of data
I had I don't know 20 or 30 years of cleaned up data back in the day. And so we had huge
databases that we could go through and
You start looking at daily data or even weekly or monthly data
You you're talking about so many data points if you throw them on like a bell curve or something
You're seeing you're going to see a wide variety of different types of conditions
and so I viewed my job as a money manager more as uh
managing all this random data coming in and just making good money management decisions and dealing with all the data and
Not getting too emotionally involved in you know, what did the gold market do today? I don't really care
You know, it's just another piece of data. I had the process and
I think that was a maybe the good fortune of being a more of a data processing mentality a statistician mentality and engineer mentality
It's kind of a puzzle for you to figure out. Yeah, I have always treated the the whole money management concept and trading is to me
is just a puzzle it's just no different than trying to work as a donkou or a crossword puzzle or
You know solve something a brain teaser. It's
It's a mental effort. It's like golf. You'll never achieve a perfect round of golf
Every time you get done you say, you know, if I could have just made that putt on 17
I could have done this and there's always a way to look ahead and say
You know, I can do better than this and and I think trading's the same way you never arrive at the final destination and you only
sort of
Get better at it over your lifetime and then somewhere along the way you die and you can't get any better
But you never you never achieve the final destination. You never become the perfect trader
Yeah, so howard frazier has a question and kind of a quickie, but he really wants your views on
initial capital at risk versus unrealized gains
And it may I guess he's just kind of looking to hear your wide view on that
My wide view is when we did studies of return to risk
At every point in a trend following trade. It's a very interesting study that you would do
And you could do it yourself if you wanted michael, you could take every buy signal you've got and say, okay, that is day
zero
I am in the position now at this price
my stop
Is wherever it is
And then you go ahead and you let the trade continue on
and
You measure the risk per contract
of and the return
You calculate ahead and and use your historical database to figure out what the final result of that trade ultimately is
But then you go back and you go through every day of the trade and figure out what was the potential future return
For the rest of that trade versus the risk
At at that point in time so on day five
Let's say the trade's going to be at
30 days long and you're going to make 10 percent
On day five
It's only going to be 25 days to go till you're out of it
And it's only going to have a certain amount of return. It might not be 10 percent
It might be seven and a half
And then what is the risk at that point?
And so we'd measure return to risk every single day throughout the entire trend following trade
and we did this over hundreds and hundreds of trades
and we realized that
and concluded without a doubt that
The day you get into a trend following trade is the day when you return to risk ratio is the best
The farther you go into the trade ala the question on pyramiding that someone asked
Uh pyramiding means you're getting in later in the trade and expecting it to continue to go your way
The return to risk ratio is not as good with a pyramid trade. So we
Pyramided or added positions, but we did them in very diminished quantity and under very stringent
low risk conditions
Where like we'd have a pullback or something and we could move our stop up tight to the market and we felt comfortable doing that
In putting on a very small additional position
That that's a very tricky proposition to try to keep your return to risk ratios high enough to justify doing that
Your initial return to risk ratio is the highest
The day you get into the trend following trade
Now on the ongoing risk to ask to answer Howard's question there
I always felt because of that nature that trend following
A market that has gone in one direction and it favors your position. You're trying to let those profits run
at some point you have uh
Let's say five days into the this trade I just described ten percent trade
We're up three percent already and so it's looking pretty good that this is going to be a profitable trade
It's not you're already moved ahead nicely and it's going your way and you don't know it's going to be ten percent
But it's moving along good so far
So the odds are now greater it turns out
Of having a profitable trade than not having a profitable trade if it moves in your direction. We did that study, too
Given that what we did was we loosened our risk and volatility controls a little bit
For an existing trade and we called that existing controls
And then we had initial limits for the initial position
And the existing trade levels were always a little higher than the initial
Risk levels and volatility levels. So let's say use the one percent as an example
say one percent risk of your portfolio
And then maybe existing trades it's two percent
Risk of your portfolio. So you're giving it some room to grow
And I think you'd also make the point there here once again, this is something where people need to
Not just trust tom but to test this to see how the range of possibilities unfold exactly because
In the end each trader has to live with his or her own decision
Uh, you know i'm not going to be there to console them. So they've got a
They've got to come up with whatever level feels comfortable. I
I mean
For somebody like my mother who couldn't stand to see her account go up or down a penny
She would have to trade at like a tenth of one percent risk to keep it so boring
but
uh, I think it's everybody's got their own level of comfort and I think you need to
Understand what that is. Let's say you're
I don't know warren buffett's because I had an example and he's going to go into trading
20 commodity markets and he's only going to put up uh, one million dollars to do that
Well, that's going to be such jump change of his total net worth
He might want feel comfortable
Holding a different risk level because it's immaterial to him even if he loses it all
And so so his comfort level could be a lot different because of his situation
Uh comfort level also come from expertise his utility his utility of money for sure
It's going to be different there at that stage of the game exactly
There's also expertise levels if somebody's very very into their systems and understands exactly what they're doing
And is comfortable with drawdowns generated by those strategies because they're so knowledgeable in systems
Well, then you can run your risk levels a little higher perhaps because there's that
technical expertise
That you have over the novice but the pure novice with no no experience no nothing keep it low the lower you go
Just putting a trade on and taking it off even at a very low level may not be material to making a lot of money
But it's very material to your experience and your growth as a trader
Yeah
I have one last question tom
But I want to make a comment overall for people because we were kind of getting into it there a second ago
Which is the idea of kind of a guru status. I I think tom
If I read you tom you love giving insights about what you've experienced
And then the idea is that people can extrapolate from that
And maybe they can get a little bit of a head start or they can they can learn from your experience
They can see something but you know, I don't think tom is is is looking to hold himself out as a guru
I think he's looking to be a man who's sharing his wisdom sharing his insight saying here's my past experiences
And I think the group of questions were pretty good that I I think most people kind of get that about you tom
But there's some questions where you could kind of tell people, you know
They they they want like the magic answer and if you give them the magic answer, then they're validated
And that's really not what you're trying to get across to people. Is that fair assessment?
It's a fair assessment
the only reason I put
The direction that I have on my indicators and my hedges every day on my facebook pages because I have a brother-in-law and I have a
Stepson who are trying to uh muddle through early stages of trading and I find it convenient to communicate with them
uh in that manner because they do have facebook pages and they can actually
Find out which way i'm leaning to then ask me questions, which they usually do and
And become more knowledgeable. I'm trying to help my steps and learn how to become a trader and manages 401k and all that and
so
I did I I started doing it just for
Basically relatives and friends that were asking me the questions. It's dovetailed into this like 300 friends all over the world thing
um
that uh, I wasn't quite expecting at the time, but
I don't mind carrying on the tradition. Well, I I hope hopefully i'm responsible for uh, eliminating some of your free time in your life
It seems to me a lot of new friend requests usually have them michael cozell essay. Imagine that
Yeah
Okay, here's the last question I have for the day. So this is jeremy clifford and he once again
He's talking about this. Uh, I mentioned david harding being on cnbc recently and I guess harden gave a story
about uh getting long
At crude oil at like 30 bucks a barrel and he said he was I guess he must have said in the interview
He was a little nervous
And but you know his system said get long you got long
It turned out to be a great trade
And so jeremy's saying do you have anything that you can think back of?
Where you know the the signal said, you know, get long or get short and your gut was just like no way
This is insane, but it's your system you stuck with it. You did it and it turned out to be a great winner
Um, yeah, that's on the spot question
I've had those i'm trying to remember a specific example. One of them I believe was
The market timing signal that I got to buy mutual funds off of the bottom
action after the 87 crash
Uh, I mean the world was coming to an end everybody
I mean they were flooding liquidity in with the fed and and uh, you know, we lost 23 on the dow in one day
something like that and the mutual funds fortunately were in cash about a week or two before the signal went
When the signal went off it was already a week before the crash actually hit
So I preserved all the assets and now we're getting a buy signal and i'm thinking to myself boy
It's just artificial. We got the fed coming in we got
Super volatility, you know that's going off the off the map
But it's a buy signal and if this thing runs up we're going to be caught without a position and it's not what we do
So I said it doesn't feel comfortable
But you know, it turns out if you bought in right after that crash it it did nothing but go up for a
a year or so
Um, it was a good period and
You just have to shake your head and go oh boy, this would be interesting
And but you got to follow the strategy. I
People at trendstat had a role with me. I said, you know as long as you do exactly what these computers tell you to do
I'll take the responsibility for the commuters to be doing it correctly and i'll also take the responsibility
For having the strategy produce losses during any period but you're going to take the responsibility of actually executing it flawlessly
And by separating that out
Um, you know, I relieved them of any stress of being wrong on the market direction or anything and they could execute
Um, but yeah, I had a few times over my life that i've had that happen and it has been surprising how many times
When you're most uncomfortable so are almost everybody else out there and by the time everybody gets comfortable
The market's already moved significantly in the in that direction. You gotta just
Gotta just turn your brain off a little bit and do the trade
So tom, do you have I know we you if you want to say mike i'm i'm i'm fried i'm done
Um, but do you have anything that those are the end of the question?
So if there's any other thought or wrap up that you might want to go or we can just uh
Pause until the new year and hopefully find you again on the podcast in the new year
Well, it'd be fine
But I think the only thing I think we can encourage people to do out of this is what I try to encourage
Everybody to do really is to find their own way
List down what your resources are what your skill levels are what your mental capabilities are
How many dollars are you going to put into the thing? What markets are you trying to trade?
And figure it out and design what what works for you
Because what works for you is not going to work for me and what works for me is not going to work for you
So I get a lot of questions on things
And i'm happy to have the questions i'm happy to help when uh people have issues
uh, but I would encourage
that sort of introspective look at oneself to decide how do I want to trade because
I've seen so many successful traders and do it so many different ways
I think it's the key is when you look at what they're doing it matches what they are
And they didn't go out and just follow somebody else
You're probably most happiest when someone who's been asking you questions
Disappears and finally stops asking you questions
No, I well, I you know what? I mean, they're philosophically well philosophically. I think they finally either get it or give up
I don't not show which but uh, if they if I don't hear from them again, it's hard to say
Yeah, that's fair point fair point
But uh, you know guys, uh, a lot of times when they're starting out
They'll ask a lot of questions or they become a fund on facebook and they'll ask me some questions and I try to give them
you know concise answers on
and get them pointed in the right direction, but
Invariably, some of those answers are going to lead them off into you know, maybe months of work and
So if they're going to go off and do that work great, it's going to take months
I I probably don't hear from them for a while
uh, but
You know, there's a lot of guys you've interviewed and listen to some of the podcast myself
It's phenomenal how much effort they put into thinking through their own strategies
And they aren't doing what I do. They're doing something different
And yet they are successful in their own right and it matches who they are
What their dollar sizes are?
Some of them are working full-time. Uh, I mean larry. I remember just started up his new car dealership
There and uh has a phenomenal life plan and a great trading strategy
And it's not the same as mine, but he's got a lot of things going for him
Just lots of other guys. Uh steve burns. Uh,
Listen to his podcast. I thought it was great
Um, I I can't even remember all the names and all the ones i've listened to anymore, but
there's a lot of
Smart people out there and they all have different talents than I have
I mean a lot of people that know a lot more about economics than I know about economics. Let's say
So maybe that's useful
They may know a lot more about computer programming than I do i'm an engineer, but I wouldn't call myself a programmer
I can program but you know, I keep it simple. You know tom. I have to fess up
So I think this is like 93 94 podcast or something. You're not the only person that's having a memory problem with all these podcasts
So I can't I can't really admit that but there is an issue going on here
Congratulations on that by the way, because I think you've hit a wonderful pitch where I think you're exceptional at interviewing
And uh, this is the real game that we've had where we've had everybody. Yes, the questions
It's just been a blast for me. I hope it's been fun for you, too
Yeah, I think we're like right
And as long as the person is willing to jump around on topics because you get kind of far afield sometimes on the next question
I don't mind it. Um, if it's useful for someone, you know all the better but I think it's a fun way to
To lay down some recording in the digital world
It doesn't cost you that much to put it up there and it's digitally free to download
And you're helping a lot of people out there and you obviously have a big fan base
I tell you it's amazing these podcasts
This this month will probably end up being the largest month even on a short month even with thanksgiving
And I mean we're just talking hundreds and hundreds of thousands of listens
And a lot of these individual episodes are I mean, it's just thousands and thousands of listens
So it's it's it's really fun to watch and I think it's some somewhere like 147 countries and territories
I mean tom we're never going to get to that many in our life. So
Well, i've traveled the world but I haven't traveled every country and I don't want to
Well, listen i'm gonna let you run, uh, I appreciate your time today and we'll get this up later today
Well, it's my pleasure and uh, good luck to everybody out there. Thanks tom and enjoy the ride


# Chapter 67

Here's the first question I have for you today, and a bunch of folks on the internet also
had some questions too.
But I think one of the things that's interesting about you, and I think this is somewhat what
you're known for, at least by reputation, but you're very good nature.
And there are a lot of people in the industry, so to speak, and maybe traders where sometimes
they lose sight of the happy part of life.
They just lose sight of life.
In fact, they get so fixated with the screen and the idea of making the millions and what
they think will come with all the millions, and they get caught up in that.
And you're so good natured.
So I guess my first question is, is there a reason why Tom Basso is so good natured?
I mean, you signed a lot of your posts, you know, enjoy the ride, my friends.
I mean, it's very good nature.
That stands out as unusual in today's society.
Yeah, I suppose.
I guess when I was going through high school, I ended up sort of observing my own behavior
quite a bit.
It was a weird thing where I almost have the second part of my brain that would watch
what Tom Basso did every day.
I kind of, I don't know, it was a weird thing, but it kind of gave me the ability
to sort of analyze how did I react to the world around me day after day.
And I used to do it pretty much once a day, sort of think through the day and kind of say,
did I react well to that situation?
Was I overly nervous or overly excited, overly depressed, overly scared or whatever?
And I think as time went on through college and I played a lot of basketball,
I started noticing, you know, being able to be sort of out of my my own body.
I could I could almost look at our defense and call out where everybody was supposed
to be and could see guys behind me because I could in my mind keep track of the other
five guys and there's one missing.
So he's got to be behind my vision and, you know, just stuff like that.
And as I expanded and I got into the real world, I realized that I sort of took
that attitude with life in general.
I just it's sort of like a movie and I'm just flowing with it.
And, you know, trading is one part of my life.
But so is hitting golf balls and so is cooking dinner and so is eating dinner.
And so is watching television and, you know, being a husband to my wife and all the other
things that go on with life.
And I don't know, to make trading your whole world seems a bit shallow to me.
There's so much more to life.
And it is so short.
You get reminded of that as you get older.
And I'm 61.
Now you get start seeing some of your friends pass away and you start realizing,
you know, it's nice to take some time to go to Tahiti like I was telling you I was making
arrangements for this morning, you know, just to enjoy some things that you've never done
before and and help other people.
To me, you know, I only have a finite time on this earth, but trading will go on hopefully
way past my lifetime.
And it's nice to pass along this simple things that I've learned that aren't rocket
science is science, really, as you know, from your knowledge of trend following.
It's not that difficult.
People make it difficult, I think, and I think if you can help people understand how simple
it is and how there's other more to life than just trading, I think that's a good thing.
More balance in the world.
I'm going to give a shout out to a young guy who I believe you're on his podcast, Andrew
Selby.
And I caught a line that as I was preparing to talk to you today, I caught a line where
you talked about the idea of imagining and I'm paraphrasing, so I'll let you tell it
incomplete, but imagining the horror, even if it doesn't happen, imagine feeling it.
And when I saw you say that, or I saw the comment, I thought to myself, stoicism,
was I on the right path?
Yeah, I think what you're trying to, you're trying, was this a reference to how to prepare
for things?
Right.
Like mental exercises and whatnot, and you were talking about the imagining, and my first
thought when I saw it, because I always think of stoicism, it's like, you know, think of,
think through the worst case scenarios, live them, live them in your mind.
And then when some of these bad things happen, you're not so surprised.
Well, that's exactly right, but I'd also argue that you should also live through
the good times as well in your mind.
So when you're getting into a position, if you could say, if this went insane, like
if tomorrow or something, this stock I just bought gets an offer for twice the value
that I just put into it.
What does that mean?
How do I react?
Am I overly excited, adrenalized, do I want to take the profit, or am I just going to
follow my strategy and just do what I do?
And I think you got to prepare yourself for all sides of it, not just the bad ones,
but the good ones too.
I think you have to think ahead, go through a lot of different scenarios, and be prepared
mentally to deal with them.
That's kind of the trend following in the emotional arena as well.
Yeah, it really is.
It really is.
Tell me about some of, since we kind of started going down the psych side of things, so
to speak, the mental side, tell me some about your mental exercises, so to speak.
And I'm assuming the mental exercises, whether you're driving the car or whatnot, that
these are for far more than just trading.
Yeah, I played all sorts of games on myself over my lifetime with my brain, and I think
that it reaps some good rewards.
I've already mentioned the sort of observer self that I had in high school and through
college.
As I observed myself doing things, I think eventually, somewhere, probably after college,
I would say, this observer part of my brain, that just I kind of had a certain part of
my brain dedicated to kind of keeping track of what Tom was doing every day, that sort
of meshed right into my brain, sort of.
It became such a natural thing for it to be there.
I don't even think about it.
I don't see it as a separate entity or part of my brain that would dedicate itself to
watching Tom do his day.
I think all sorts of exercises, you can play games with minds, for instance, I remember
Van Tharp saying that young children that were about ready to young boys mostly that
would go out and fight their first tiger, try to hunt their first lion, would be taught to
defocus their eyes state and see what it does to your brain.
And because it sort of takes away a lot of your fear, I tried doing that on the golf
course to some success, where you're walking down a fairway, you look at a distant
object, but then after you're focusing your eye on the distant object like the pin,
you try to see your peripheral vision clearly as well, so that the whole thing becomes
just, you know, this monster view going into your brain and you're not focused on
any one thing like that lake over to the right that your ball could go into if you
hit it poorly. It's just this one big vision and fear goes away.
Lots of different things, breathing, noticing that you're breathing heavy or
you're talking faster or you're moving faster or those types of things.
All just being an observant, I think, is a lot of it.
Driving, I've played games with just wondering how these guys get off the drag
race, you know, when the light goes green.
So I'll be sitting there and I'm watching everybody else who's playing with their
texting and listening to the radio and doing everything.
And I'm sitting there in the first position at an intersection, of course,
being careful to look both ways, making sure nobody's coming at me.
You know, trying to see what would be the quickest possible reaction time that my
body can take my foot off the brake and put it on the gas, not to go fast, but
just to be the first car moving into the intersection, leaving the rest of them
still wondering what's going on.
Just little things like that.
I think it's all been fascinating, learning how the human body works and
how the brain works.
And I think even though we can't get into the minutia of all these different
types of things in this conversation, if anything, you can inspire people in
the audience that are younger, maybe they're starting out or maybe they've
gone the wrong directions.
You can inspire people to start to think more about this, this mental
aspect of success.
Because if you don't have mental capability and good psychology and
trading, the rest of everything you'll do will be destroyed.
You can always, you can have the most fantastic, I could, I could automate
a program, put it in a black box, hand it to somebody who is a basket case
mentally, and they will screw it up because they have the ultimate ability
to, you know, the person that doesn't have good control of their mind is
going to have a problem, even executing a well-constructed black box because
they will screw it up.
They will override it.
They will not do a trade that they should have done.
They'll take profits too quick because they finally feel like they've got all
this profit built up and they don't want to wait for their stop signal to
get hit, they'll never do it.
I think as soon as people realize that the mental side of trading is the
first and foremost, and then next up probably is going to be your position
sizing, control of your risk volatility, all those issues on the
portfolio, and last and least important is going to be what you buy
and sell or where do you buy and sell, basically.
You know, on the emotional side, as you're bringing that up, you're not
just necessarily pointing out to, let's say, new traders or inexperienced
traders, there are plenty of super successful, not necessarily sure how
they got there, but plenty of super successful, maybe people, maybe they
had a little luck, very wealthy people that make those mental errors
that you're talking about, and a life's fortune can go down very fast.
It certainly has, and if you look at, say, the first Market Wizards
book and even the second one, you'll see certain people in there that
are no longer around because they might have done well up to them, but
they were pushing the envelope and maybe they didn't have their mental
processes screwed on as straight as they would have liked, and went
awry along the way.
I survived 28 to 30 years roughly trading, if you want to count now,
that's another 10 years, trading currencies with no issues blowing up
or I'm still doing it.
I mean, it's a long run, and a lot of traders don't make it that long,
and I think a lot of it's due to how they think through the process
and how much risk they want to take on and how much they can stay
with something day after day after day after day.
I've always been pretty calm towards the whole thing, and I think
that's reflected in maybe, I mean, some people have accused me of
being a little bit on the boring side in terms of trading.
I'd never went for the fancy profits or anything, the big profits,
but I like to try to avoid the losses and continue to plug along,
and I think that serves you well over the long run.
A lot of people could take a good lesson from that.
You're one of my most popular guests, if not the most popular,
so you're boring must be pretty exciting to a lot of people.
That's my impression.
Every time we do one of these interviews,
I get about 15 emails or Facebook letters.
Well, let me jump into some trading issues.
I had a couple of points that people brought up and a couple of things on my own.
I saw a line.
I just want to read it to you and tell me what you think about it.
So the quote was this.
If you're not afraid of losing small amounts of money,
you're almost invincible.
Yeah. How does it strike you?
It strikes me pretty well because
that would allow you to realize on things like trend following,
where if you do the statistics on what we did at trend set back over the years,
various buy-sell programs that we would have would range from perhaps
28 percent reliable all the way up to maybe the top I would ever get would be 40.
But more realistically, 36, 37 percent reliable.
So it's averaging around 33 percent or one third, let's say.
That means every single trade I get into,
I've got a two thirds chance of losing money.
So if I take that on mentally and say, OK,
I want to make that those two losses that I statistically know I'm going to get,
I've got thousands of data points that tell me that I'm going to get two losses
for every one game, I might as well take the attitude that I got to limit
those two losses and be OK with it, because that's just two out of three
that I got to look for for every three trades I do, I'll get a profit.
Profit will be bigger than the losses.
I make money over the long run.
That's that's what we're doing here, you know.
So why would I be concerned over those small losses?
And I think once you realize that and accept it and understand why
you got to have those two losses,
then I think you're well on the way to making some good money.
I heard one person say one time, a long time ago, trading is sort of like breathing.
You got to, you know, everybody wants to breathe in because you get oxygen,
but you have to breathe out also.
And that's kind of like the losses.
They're both part of the breathing process you got to have in and out.
Yeah, I tell you, as I continue my yoga practice, the breathing is
it's the core, it's the core of it all.
Well, let me shift to another one.
So I did an interview today and someone asked me a question.
I'm going to give it back to you.
And they wanted to know why.
Trend following does so well when the black swans hit.
And so I was curious, curious as to to your if somebody asked you that.
Well, you know, Tom, why does trend following do?
Why does it do so well when the black swan events happen?
These surprises happen.
Well, trend following, it's very math is saying let your profits run
as far as they want to run and cut your losses short when they don't go your way.
The black swan happens, which is an outlier event of major consequence,
probably that has never happened before.
And it's gone like way beyond the realms of anything anybody's ever seen.
Trend following at some point is going to pick up the move in that direction.
It may be a big gap to get into it.
It may have started out months ago as nothing.
And then all of a sudden has become a speculative bubble at this point.
Everyone will happen a different way.
And I've probably seen them all in my lifetime.
But no matter where you do get in, you will get in and you will
ride part of that black swan.
And that one trade and maybe a couple of others might be the difference
between making money that year and losing money that year when you take
everything else and add it together because your small gains are going
to offset some of your small losses.
But to really make money, you need those those kind of real outlier
events that really drive, you know, a Japanese young position and you're
in it for the whole year or year and a half.
And the thing has gone up 100% on the on the face value of the currency.
And you're leveraged and you end up making, you know, hundreds or
thousands of percent that really pays the freight for a whole lot of losses.
And that's why trend calling makes money.
Let's talk about your daily routine and going back a long time.
And I caught a post the other day on your Facebook where you are talking
about the total amount of time that it took to execute your day, your daily
routine, and I want you to actually talk about routine some because I have
a feeling routine is very important in your life.
And there's a reason why routine is very important.
Um, but in, I want you to explain the time that it takes for you, but
then to also interject, of course you have to develop the system.
Um, and there's a lot of time behind that, but then once you have your
system and your, your daily execution, why don't I let you run with that
and explain what you had posted the other day?
Okay.
Let's talk about the two things.
First, the thing on time.
Uh, the other day I posted something and I think it took me 12 minutes
after the markets closed to go through my entire process.
And I forget exactly the numbers, but I want to say I moved like four
stops and one, uh, in the stock area times four accounts.
I think I moved one or two futures trades.
I can't remember how many.
Um, I also checked and moved some stops on my hedge trades and
it all took me 12 minutes.
And I did that because I was getting some posts and questions from traders
on, well, on how much they need to do and how often do they
need to look at the market?
And, you know, I was getting the reaction that some of these people
were spending their entire day looking at the screen and I'm thinking to myself,
what could I possibly do to waste that much time?
And so I thought I was going to try to just go ahead and time myself
just to make the point to everybody out there that sure.
I, if you want to argue about it, I, I've got 28 years at trend
stat, another 10 years retired honing my skills.
And that's not even 40 years yet.
That's only like 38 years.
It's only 38 years.
I'm still only 61.
Uh, but you know, when you get that much experience behind your belt,
you know, what you got to do every day.
You just have to kind of execute it.
And I think if you're trying to design a new way of trading every single
day and every single moment, looking at the screen and looking,
look at the price going up and down and trying to say, well,
what does this, does this tell me?
Should I change my strategy?
Should I do some research on this new idea that I just heard in a
podcast or a newsletter or wherever I got it from a friend, you're going
through all this gyration in your mind.
That is going to just gobble up time.
And it's so non-productive.
In my case, I know exactly what I've got to do to execute my trend
following models and I pull up my screens and I start at the top and I
start going, click, click, click, click.
And then my mouse is of course, I'm faster and faster over the years
with my mouse and my computers.
And I know exactly what I got to do next.
And I just keep going.
I try to tell my wife, just kind of, I'm going to be closing the market down.
I tell her and she knows to just kind of stay away from the
office for a little bit.
12 minutes later, I was done, stopped the clock and I went and did
the Facebook post.
So that's kind of where the time thing came from, but routine you
mentioned, and I would say routine is important.
Uh, and I, I guess I kind of, you know, I guess I got kind of the
routine side of things from the standpoint of the markets will wait
for no one is one of the things I've always told my staff at
trend set back in the day.
And that's why we had so many backups and so many, somebody's
taken a vacation.
Somebody else has to fill their spot at the markets won't shut down
because you're having a fourth of July.
Cause guess what?
London does not respect the U S is fourth of July.
We've revolted from them.
So the currency markets are open on the fourth of July.
We got to be there.
We got to still do our thing.
Who's going to take a vacation day?
Who's going to work routine becomes something that is driven
sort of by the way, the markets and really almost life work.
Uh, you know, you probably get up, you probably be good to have
breakfast in the morning because it fuels your body for the rest
of the day.
Uh, it's probably good to exercise.
I see you upside down sideways on your yoga positions and, uh,
you're obviously in good shape.
I could not do that.
Wouldn't even try the, uh, you know, say I do work out.
I am in good shape for a 61 year old, I think, and still hitting
the ball pretty well.
And I'm, I'm enjoying all these things.
I think that routine of exercising, routine of eating,
routine of hydrating your body with water, routine of making
sure you're there for the markets.
I've got to put my stops in and move my stops or check
things once a day.
So on this cruise to Tahiti, for instance, that we were talking
about earlier, I'm now up to a level with this cruise line
where they give me unlimited internet on the courtiers level,
which is where I'm going to be.
So I'm bringing along the computer and sometime each day
after the markets close in Tahiti, I will be on my computer
for my 12 minutes.
Then I will go back to having fun, but there's a certain
routine that has to be done there.
And I think that's kind of the way, uh, some people think
that's too rigid, but I, I mean, I can spare 12 minutes
on a vacation.
I don't think of that as too burdensome.
No, and especially the life freedom that you get from
making the choices that you've made.
What's it, you know, some people think, oh, I'm going
to go on vacation.
I don't want any distraction, but those are the same
people that go back and work a nine to five, uh, you
know, grind working for the boss man their entire life.
So I agree with you completely, or they go back home
and they find that they've missed all sorts of signals
that they should have missed, uh, or should have
gotten remembering the story.
I told Shwagger back when I was, he was doing new
market wizards interview with me, uh, about the
silver trade that my parents were visiting me and
I had missed the silver trade.
And it turns out it was worth like a hundred
thousand dollars.
And this was when my account was $10,000.
Um, and I'd missed it.
And when I, when I missed it because I wasn't
paying attention to my stuff, I was playing tour
guide to my parents.
I'm not blaming my parents.
It's my responsibility.
I should have been doing that.
Shouldn't have been taken by 12 minutes or
whatever it was that back then to do my work.
And I got sloppy, missed the trade, missed that
profit that would have been, uh, you know, put
me way ahead of where I ended up being now.
I would have been that much farther ahead at an
earlier stage and been profitable more early in
my trading.
So it's all, you have to really look at how you
go through every day and ask yourself, where's
the time slip away?
And because you have, you wake up in the
morning and go to sleep at night and there's
a lot of minutes in between.
And if you really think about what you spend
them on, it's kind of amazing how many
you can waste.
And in this day and age, we waste a lot
more with all these electronic gadgets for
sure.
Absolutely.
Well, this is a question from Fred Penny and
Fred had a, that was a good question.
He, uh, he said, you know, if, if you were a
20 something guy or gal today and not much,
not much money and you're just getting new
knowledge, if you were looking back and you
with your experience and saying today, and
you are approaching the kind of the trading
world today, would you, would you approach
things the same way?
Would you go about it the same way?
I don't think so.
Uh, I ended up, of course, as most people
know, a money manager and a futures trader
and a currency trader and trends that capital
was my firm before we shut it down back
in 2003, back in the day when I started,
which would be back in, uh, now starting
a trade in the seventies, really got our
first firm off the ground in 1980, a form
trends that in 84, um, broke away from
the previous firm Kennedy capital and
ended up a trend stop when I did all these
things track record, if you could just
establish that you were trading even
a hundred thousand dollars and doing it
successfully over a period of say one, two,
three years and maybe showed growth in
assets from a hundred thousand, maybe to
a half a million, maybe you got a million
now under management, people would take
a serious look at you and say, this
guy's making progress.
His track record looks solid.
I like his approach.
He seems sensible.
He said, he seems like a smart
businessman.
He's going to, he's hiring people to
back him up.
He's got computer equipment.
Yeah, we'll give him a chance.
Here's another 5 million.
And all of a sudden you got 10 million
under management and all of a sudden
somebody will give you another 10 million
and pretty soon you're at 20 and then
you're off to the races and you can
build your business that way.
Nowadays I get the perception and I'm a
little bit removed from the industry
these days being retired, but I've
heard stories where some, uh, asset
allocators would want you to have, you
know, 20 or 50 million under management
and have a staff of 10 people and
computer equipment and backup locations
and marketing staff and everything
else.
And I don't know how I would have
ever gotten into the business back
in the day.
So I think in today's world with all
the automation and with all the, I
mean, basically I use, uh, Schwab and
interactive brokers for the two sides
of my trading in a lot of my stuff.
And I use them all around the world.
I'm in Italy or Tahiti or any place.
I get an internet connection and I'm,
oh, my men, no big deal.
A lot of the charting software and
all that stuff, we had to build that
trend set in the old days.
Nowadays it's free, uh, with your
account and it just keeps getting
more and more sophisticated.
I'd be inclined to go ahead and work
a, as you said before, a nine to
five job of some sort, and perhaps
one that had a little bit of
flexibility to it so that I could do
some trading as I was working the
job.
I mean, when I was an engineer, a
chemical engineer, I could easily go
home at four 30 from designing
chemical plants and spend a half
an hour working on my commodity
account and transmit my orders and
go have dinner.
It wasn't a big deal.
So your, your real issue, your real
issue is if I'm, if I'm hearing
you is, is that where the, it's
the money management versus the
trading and they're not one in
the same.
No, they are not.
And for those people who think
they're going to get in the money
management industry, let me tell
you that the year before I shut
trend set down, I spent a hundred
grand on regulatory, uh, CPA and
legal fees, uh, at no benefit to
my client that I could see.
And I spent probably 60% of my
time, either with personnel
accounting or legal issues, less
than 10% of my time, probably
actually doing meaningful
research or trading that most
people would think is the fun
thing that they like to do.
You spend very little time
trading, more time running a
business if you want to be
successful at it.
And I think that I think for
most people, if they love
trading, I would suggest seeing a
little longer.
If it was me right now, I
probably would have a state and
engineer or moved into the
business side of my company that
I was at.
I probably would have done a
little more strategic planning
and business things and tried to
get, you know, I was highly
rated at this company I was at.
Um, they would, they, I was
promoted a month before I quit.
They seemed to like what I was
giving them and doing, uh, I
would just get more raises
there, uh, get into stock
options, get into whatever you
can get into and keep saving a
lot of that money, put it into
your trading accounts, hone your
skills at smaller amounts of
money, and then get your
portfolio to the point where it
was supplying an extra source of
income for you.
And when that extra source of
income got to the point where it
was equal to your current source
of income, we probably could
safely retire at that point.
And I probably would, would
guess that, um, uh, rather than
retiring at 51, if had I done
that, I might've been able to
retire even before, uh,
because the things that I did at
trend stat kind of by their
nature, uh, had to be very
regulatory. So for instance, I
couldn't front run or do
anything. You know, I had to be
careful with what positions I
have versus the clients and all
these things. And so basically
I had to kind of keep
everything pretty plain vanilla
with my own trading sort of
match my clients or actually
put my money in the same fund
that my clients are in so that
I'm getting exactly the same
trades in essence so that
there would be no, uh,
favoritism to me over the
clients because that's illegal.
And I think without those
restrictions, what I'm finding
after 10 years of retirement is
I can do things that I could
never do for clients. I, I
trade orange juice futures.
Jeez, I can, I only need one
of them or two of them for my
portfolio. If I had trend set
with $600 million under
management, how am I going to
buy orange juice futures? I
might be able to buy 10 or
20 of them, but, uh, that's
not going to mean anything to
my clients. So it's, it's a
whole different world when
you're trading for yourself.
You know, you mentioned the
regulatory environment and I
think it's worth pointing out
that, and I'm not purporting to
be a regulatory expert, but,
and I'm also not taking a shot
at our home country, but it
probably is worth investigating
for those of those, for those
folks listening that not all
regulatory climates are the
same and not all home
countries are the same. So
there might be some situations
that are a little less, uh,
strident than, than others. And
I'm not saying that in a way
that they're less strident,
that that means it's, you
know, cowboy and no
regulation. I'm just saying
that there are some places
where it's gotten a little
tougher than others.
Yeah. And there's some places
that, uh, that are easier. Uh,
some places that are
actually worse than the US
probably, um, some ways, uh,
very, very ancient thinking
on certain things and some
States in the US that are
worse than other States.
Now, Wisconsin comes to mind
as a, uh, state that seems
to have extremely stringent
restrictions on mutual funds
and things like that. They
seem to always have had a
tough time getting people to
to, uh, blue sky, their
stuff, uh,
worth invent, worth
investigating them for those
folks listening. Don't, don't
make assumptions that
everything in all climates
are the same and all
countries are the same. And
sadly, some of the friends
I have on Facebook that
are foreign based, uh,
they're in Australia or
they're in other, you
know, Vietnam or some
place. They realize as I
did that a lot of the
assets, uh, that you can
obtain to manage seem to
be in the US. We are a
very wealthy country and
there are a lot of assets,
a lot of pension plans and
things that need to be
managed here. Uh, when I
got into the currency
business, it got a little
bit better because there
was less regulation on
currency trading and
there was banks like Royal
Bank of Canada, Bank of
Montreal, uh, sock Jen
over in France, other
places that I had his
clients that were, uh,
you know, where I didn't
have the regulation and
they weren't in the US
and having to deal with
US stuff either. Uh, so
I had some US banks as
clients. I had some
foreign banks as clients.
It was kind of an
interesting mix and
different environments are
definitely to be explored
because how you run a
business is all going to
be about what you're
allowed to do because
between the government
and your clients
restricting the money
manager and what he or
she is able to do day
to day managing the
portfolio, that's going
to dictate some of your
success. Uh, if your
clients and regulation
don't let you buy
orange juice futures,
then you can't buy
orange nuts. It can't
be part of your
portfolio, you know,
yeah, it's just a simple
fact. So that does
affect your returns. You
have to all think about
that. Let me shift gears
on you. I love shifting
gears on you. Just why
not? Right. I love it.
That's why I like your
interviews. I never
know where they're
going. It's my brain's
not a straight line. Um,
so, uh, Clint Stephens,
uh, I think, you know,
Clinton, Clinton, uh,
it's kind of a
combination question here,
but he kind of wanted
to know, do you tinker
with your current
systems and kind of
adding into that, how do
you know when you're
dealing with a normal
drawdown versus like,
uh, oh, this system is
shot. So, you know, do
you still tinker and how
do you know when, when
something has really gone
the wrong way? Okay.
First one, uh, do I
tinker? I'm currently in
my futures trading using
the same buy and sell
triggers that I think I
created and probably
were using back in about
1984. How ancient? How
archaic? And they're
they can't be useful.
They can't be good
anymore. Tom, they've
got to be, they're,
they're, they're, they've
got to be retired.
Those virtually
identical. I used to
sit down and the only
difference is I used to
do it all on graph
paper. And now I have
computers that are
sitting there and I'm
looking at fancy colors
and all sorts of data
that I didn't have
available. Uh, so it's
a little easier because
the graph, the graph
paper would take you
from 12 minutes to
30 minutes. Yeah. Yeah.
I used to, I used to take
about an hour doing my
futures portfolio. But
my goal over my lifetime
was actually to put
myself out of work, um,
so that I could have
more time to golf and
do other things. So you
don't, you don't tinker.
Okay. That one's off. What
about that much? No,
I, but that being
said, let's say I come
up with, um, well, uh,
for a good example, uh,
ETFs, uh, never were
around what back in the
day I traded mutual
funds. So we'd look for
no log mutual funds and
we'd have to do end of
day buy and sell because
that's the nature of a
mutual fund. When, when
ETFs exchange traded
funds, that is, came into
being and started trading
continuously throughout
the day, then you could
start thinking about
stuff like stop orders
and, and you could do
things that were, might
get executed intraday,
even if you were not
executing them, the stops
would be executed
intraday. And it, uh, to
me, it minimized the risk
of the overnight gap type
of situation a little
bit more. Uh, and
therefore was a good thing
to start looking to add
to my portfolio. So I
wouldn't call that
necessarily tweaking as
much as looking at
various new products
that might come into
the portfolio. And I
might have to do
something a little
different to actually try
to physically trade
those. But the ones
that I've had in the
past, I don't tweak too
much now. And on the
other question you had
on the drawdown, if the
drawdown starts to be a
little steep, how do
you know when things
tell you what I do
there? Uh, and this is
the scenario analysis we
were talking about
earlier a little bit. If
you know, you've got a
strategy and you've
thought through, okay, if
this thing goes well, and
I have these types of
market conditions, this
is what's going to
happen. Good. This is
what's going to happen
if it goes really to
crap. And this is
what's going to happen
if we just kind of
have an expected, you
know, month or six
months. If you've really
thought and done a good
job of that, then you
should ask yourself on a
drawdown, look at the
markets you're trading,
look at your portfolio,
look at the market
action that has been
provided to you by the
market. You had nothing
to do with that. That
was just the universe
sending you ups and
downs and all over the
places. And ask
yourself, given those
conditions, would you
have expected anything
different than what
you're seeing? If the
answer is yes, then I
would say, then
something's wrong with
your strategy and you
need to do some tweaking
and need to do some
homework and work and
research and whatever to
find out what's the
difference between what
you would have expected
versus what actually
happened. But if you
ask or answer that same
question, you know,
this is an
extraordinarily choppy
period. And there's
been some violent
disruptions that, you
know, I would get caught
in with this strategy
and I would expect to
have a drawdown. Then
it's not broken. Don't
fix it.
Straightforward.
Straightforward.
That's kind of how I
look at it.
Jim Byers has a
question and Jim was
curious if you are a one
system guy or multiple
systems.
Multiple. When we have
trend stat and running
our flagship fund, the
market math last year is
before I closed everything
down. We had six
different portfolios
within the fund that
ranged from trading
commodity options to two
different approaches and
currencies, two different
approaches in futures and
one approach to mutual
fund timing. And I think
within the mutual fund
timing, even there was
two different sub pieces
to that. And in one of
the futures areas,
there's probably a couple
sub pieces there. So
there was a lot of
interesting stuff going
on there. And all those
mats were trend
following in a way, but
they were all very
different in how they
took on what they took
on. So they ultimately
got, they all got to
trend following, but you
had thought through
different ways of getting
there based on the
markets, based on what I
was trying to accomplish,
based on how much risk
that particular portfolio
was trying to take on
some of the strategies we
had, particularly the
ones that were more
28% reliable because
they're 28% reliable.
The math would say you
got to have a bigger gain
when you have a gain. The
losses could be bigger
as well, but you got more
losses that you're going
to take as a percentage
of the total. So you've
got to have a real big
one hit. And so that was
one where we slightly
added to positions in a
conservative way and when
risk would allow. And we
would try to really
maximize those particular
trades each year that
came along that were
really, really paid the
way. Other strategies
were more, you know,
just catch every
intermediate move up and
down and don't worry
about the big one that
we'll be there for it. We
get whipsawed along the
way. So what the big
guy next door will pick
up the big gain and not
get whipsawed. And so
we'd have different kind
of personalities to
these trading strategies.
And some clients would
pick and choose and
say, I like that. I
don't like that. If
you got market math,
then it was my decision
as to how it was all
allocated. And we did a
lot of research on that
and how much exposure we
wanted to each of the
strategies. And then we
rebalanced that monthly
back to the set point. So
that kind of the
Robin Hood approach of
taking from the wealthy
strategy and giving it
to the poor strategy. So
whatever was in a draw
down was being fed
and whatever was on a
explosive up move and
equity was coming in
like crazy. We're
taking money off of the
table and that
stabilized everything and
kind of kept us with a
nice steady performance.
I think you've got
some great wisdom and
you've got some great
perspective and you've
had a very long
business career starting
as a young man. And so
we're in an interesting
climate, so to speak, an
interesting economic
climate and everybody can
hear the political
debates, regardless of
the side of the fence
you're on. The debates
are out there. Some
folks want more
government. Some folks
want less government. I
know where you fall on
the spectrum. We
probably have very, very
similar views. I'm not
really looking to kind
of go down the blame
game or the names game,
but I would really just
like for you maybe to
paint a picture from
your perspective, watching
markets evolve, watching
governments evolve in
this, especially
watching the feds
involvement, maybe
paint a case for people
that don't have your
lens, your time horizon
lens, paint a picture
for people about how
you see what's going
on today in terms of
let's just keep it very
narrow fed action. It
seems it seems like to
me where it we're in
brave new territory. Are
we or is it just some of
the same that we've
seen over the decades?
Well, I might back up
from just the fed thing
to even a little bit
something just slightly
bigger than that in
that society in general
these days seems to be
gravitating down and
certainly fed is doing
the same thing along
this line of not
taking responsibility for
themselves. It's really
you've taken the
responsibility, for
instance, to go to
Vietnam, to go to
Asia and to do your
speaking to bootstrap a
business out of your
podcasts and to be
successful. I think that
took a lot of work and
a lot of courage and a
lot of things. And I
think the average person
when they're in front of
the television every
night and they can get
a government stipend of
some sort or you know,
maybe can get an
unemployment benefit and
not have to go out and
look for a job tomorrow
or kind of cold
tomorrow. I think I'll
stay in. I think
they're suddenly second
by second minute by
minute and with respect
to the Fed, the same
thing, you know, there's
this tendency to think
that government, the Fed
and the big entities are
going to take care of all
these little individuals
and the individuals kind
of allow them to do that
strangely, because it's
it's the easy way to go
rather than the difficult
way that you've gone or
that I've gone. It's
easy to not take
responsibility. It's
easy to say somebody else
is to fault for the way
that my little life is
today. I think the Fed
is sitting there saying,
okay, well, we got an
economy that's being
overburdened by a
government that's
spending more than it
takes in. We got what
17 trillion in actual
debt. We got a hundred
trillion in unfunded
liabilities. That's adds
up to about 117
trillion. The GDP of
the country is only
about 15, 16 trillion a
year. So that's multiple
years of total 100% GDP
to have you get close to
this, this huge number of
liability that we have.
That's not a good recipe
for success. I don't
care. I don't, I can't
imagine any economist
could put a good spin on
that. Although the
Keynesians seem to try.
But the reality of it
is, is, uh, Fred is
just saying, what other
choice do we have? Kind
of, uh, if the, the
stock market were to
crash, if, uh, commodities
start skyrocketing, if
we have unabated
inflation, or if we have
a depression or whatever,
it's going to spill over
to the entire world. It
could get really rough.
And then there's going to
be riots in the streets
and there's going to be
all sorts of problems. And
I hate to be negative. So
you try to look at the
positive side and they
just try to say, okay,
well, let's, let's see
if we can keep, you
know, funding enough
money into this thing to
keep it, you know,
muddling along
somehow, you know, over
time, maybe somebody
brilliantly figures out
a way out of a mess. It's
looking pretty dismal, I
think, over the long run
in that, I don't think
the Fed, the Fed has
used so many different
tools so far. And I
think they're sort of
running out of quivers
in their, their arrows
in the quiver, so to
speak, uh, they've kind
of used them and I don't
know what, uh, they're
going to be able to do
going forward if things
get tough. So, uh, I
would remain very
cautious towards your
trading. And I would
also look at, like you
have at other countries
and diversify
internationally if you
can, and, uh, do what
you can to protect
yourself. So I think
times could get a little
interesting going
forward. I think what's
interesting about what
you say too, isn't I
saved that question for
last because I wanted
to establish in our
conversation that
you're a price based
trend follower and that
you are going to, your
trading is going to
respond to whatever
activity is happening in
the markets, either up
or down to place the
view that you just had
the public policy view
that you just put out
there. That's just your
learned view about the
proper way society should
go. But your trading is
going to, you know, you're
going to do well, whichever
way the markets go. And
I, and I think sometimes
people get a little lost
in that. They might say,
well, what is, why does
Tom Basso have, have
this opinion or why does
Mike Covel have this
opinion about the
markets? Who cares? And
my, my report is, you
know, it's gotten so
unusual if you don't
have a public policy
view, regardless of what
your trading is, I
start to wonder what's
wrong with you, not you,
Tom. But, you know, if
you, if this has gotten
so unusual out there that
if you don't have a view,
it kind of scares me.
Well, and it also goes
back to what I think I
did in the Andrew
interview that you
probably listened to
about one of the most
profound things that
happened to me along the
way was disability to
listen to someone
talking and separate fact
from opinion and flag
them in my brain. So
when you're reading a
Wall Street Journal
article that some
analyst is saying, I
think this and the
market's going to be here
and that's my
prediction. And you just
kind of flag it and say,
okay, that's interesting,
but it's just an opinion.
And when Tom says
something or Michael says
something, same thing.
However, if I say the
market closed at 183.76
today, or whatever it
is, whatever number it
is, that is an actual
data point. That's a
fact. That's not my
opinion. It is just a
number. I think once you
start separating facts
and data from people's
opinions, the whole world
of trading gets a whole
lot clearer because in my
mind, I could think the
world's going to come to
end, you know, it's a
hell in the next year. And
I could still be along
the market. I really
don't have any other
choice. I mean, where
else are you going to
put your money and where
else are you going to
try to hold on to some
of the value with the
Fed sort of devaluating
the dollar by pumping so
much money into the
system that you're
probably going to end up
having to make tens and
20% returns just to try
to even hold your, hold
yourself even in terms of
purchasing power. That's
a pretty daunting task.
Yeah, it is strange days
indeed. But I think I
love hearing your wisdom
and I know the audience
says too, and I, I
appreciate you taking the
time today from, from
Arizona, lovely Arizona
sunny and 68 today.
Well, I'm jealous. It
was like five degrees
here the other day. Hey,
Tom, listen,
if they want to, if they
want to catch up with you,
they'll have to find you
on Facebook. You're not
trying to advertise
anything or promote
anything. I know I'm
retired happily. So if
they're not advertising
anything, if they can,
if they can find you,
that's the challenge. If
you want to find Tom,
you have to find him.
I'm not telling you
where he is.
So you'll spell T O M.
I think they'll find
you. Hey, listen, Tom,
I appreciate it. And
hopefully we can talk
again in the new year
once I'm in another
continent.
No problem, Michael,
enjoying it. You're
welcome as usual. Thank
you, sir.


# Chapter 68

How are you?
I'm doing fantastic. Just got back from two weeks in French Polynesia and very relaxed
I'm taking a break from moving five tons of gravel in my yard right now
To talk to you and then I'll go back to that when we're done
The five tons of gravel sounds like good exercise to say the least. That's the way I view it
Yeah, so French Polynesia. I've not been there even though I've been in roughly that same part of the world
That's probably I'm guessing if I looked at a map. That's probably another 10 hours from where I've been in Southeast Asia
About yes, it's in the southern hemisphere just off
Kind of down by New Zealand area. It's pretty far south and
Although very you know in their summertime right now, so 80s humid
Probably a lot like Vietnam and some other places in the summer
Could you live in a place like that? Not if I had my choices
But yeah, I could live there if I had to but I I really enjoy Arizona a lot
It has the best of it seems to me the mountains and some of the peace and quiet in the beautiful trees
And then it's got the desert down in the valley with Phoenix area where there's a lot of action
lots of concerts and plays and
restaurants and things to do
They're only 90 minutes away from each other. So I sort of have the best of both worlds
you know, I have to give you and Jack Schwager and Charles Faulkner all a big shout-out because
My podcast keeps evolving and changing and I've had a lot of non-trading guests on and some fairly noteworthy
But I think the three of you guys coming on really early and kind of giving me some credibility has really helped to
Expand things out. So I'm most appreciative for you sticking with me Tom. I
Always have fun talking to you. I
Spend zero time preparing for it and it's just out. It's just a hole in my schedule and it's always fun. Listen, here's where
I want to go. I thought there's something fairly topical we could talk about
I don't know how you want to set it up or how we should play with it
But I've seen in the headlines
there's been some hedge funds that have had not the greatest returns this year and a lot of people are
Bemoaning the price of oil which is kind of funny
you would think oil drops everyone should be happy but
apparently there's so many budgets and
Programs and social programs tied to high oil around the world and so a lot of people aren't happy
But hey, this is a zero-sum game
So quite a few people that in our little world are happy that oil has dropped
But I think what's so interesting is how many people and I haven't tried to google this but how many people?
Five six seven months ago. We're talking about a 50% crater in oil
You just nobody was predicting this at all
But then there's one trading strategy that seemed to do exceptionally well during this unpredictable run, huh? Yeah trend following
We all you have to do is short at someplace up around 100 or 90 and and enjoy the ride
Yeah, but you you make it sound so simple
I mean, there's it there's some very I saw the head of OPEC and he said well the speculators are doing this
Hold on it. What price are the speculators not involved in oil?
They're involved at every single price. The reason the speculators are in there
Helps to create a price without the speculators there and the constant buying and selling
You wouldn't know where the price of oil is from second to second
You might know where it was from maybe day to day or maybe even hour to hour is big
Large companies and large hedgers and things made a transaction, but the market would be very inefficient
It would jump all over the place
With speculators there you have every second trades going off and you know exactly what a price of oil is second by second
And Tom I know you personally don't ponder these things so much because you you've been there done that you understand it deep in your gut
But when you you hear a headline where the head of OPEC is saying that the price is
Where it should not be the fundamentals do not support this price and and cast blame at speculators for this particular point of price
Explain to the audience just how disingenuous that is. Well, it's disingenuous because
the price of anything is where someone will buy and sell it to each other at if a
Speculator would be selling it and driving the price down
Someone else has to be buying it to make that transaction happen and for that person to be buying it
That could also be a speculator
So wait a second
How can speculators be driving it down if speculators are on both sides of that trade or it could have been a hedger like let's say
Southwest
Airlines in the past has come in and bought gas when they thought it was cheap and maybe they're thinking that now
So maybe the speculator selling it to Southwest air
And they're hedging their future fuel costs. All right, fine. Well, then it goes down cheaper
Well Southwest can buy some more future cheap oil. I don't see
You know that nobody ever complains like OPEC when the prices go skyrocketing up to 100 and something
But the same speculators are there at that point in time as they are right now
It doesn't like a speculators don't just short the market. They they go both ways and so it's it's this very
It's for public relations. It's trying to place blame. It's trying to placate their people because Saudi Arabia depends so much as does Norway and
There's a trend. Yeah, Norway. I think it is that some of the socialistic type of programs out there in the countries
That depend on oil. I think Brazil to some extent Venezuela
All countries that are leaning towards liberal socialist types of things and using oil revenues to try to help pay for them
Well now they don't have those revenues anymore. It's in a level that they used to so
They try to place blame try to you know, not point the finger at themselves for setting up a budget that was based on
The house of cards, but you know, that's the way the world works these days. It seems yeah, you know
It's I just was in Dubai
Thursday Friday Saturday
And so when you talk about when the price of oil is high no one complains
Well, I know why they're not complaining because I just saw what they've been building with that oil money over there
It's it's I mean, frankly, it's fabulous. They've done a fabulous job building out of city
I don't know if it's where I'd want to live but I really they've done a hell of a job
I've seen the photos on your Facebook page. They're very impressive. Yeah, they've done a hell of a job
Hey, let me jump into something really basic and I was since we've talked a bunch of times
I've the real challenge in speaking with you is because
To try and not let you get the feeling of being bored. So like how do I
Make sure that I'm giving you something somewhat fresh very difficult to do very difficult to do
But listen, let's talk about your stomach lining for a second and just go back and just I think this is a good reminder
For whether it's the professional out there the new trader the new investor and talk about Tom Basso's stomach lining
And if you don't mind also the rush and the devastation, you know, we have that we can have this emotional rush
Oh my gosh, I make it so much money and I'm losing money the devastation but talk about your own stomach lining Tom
Let's just talk about that that lining
Well, first of all, my stomach lining seems to be doing just fine as far as I can tell
I have never had any ulcers or anything else knock on wood, I guess
In my early trading years, which was well reported and swagger's new Market Wizards chapter on me
There were some silver trades that went all over the place
that really
Was catching my attention almost hour by hour. It was pretty much
It was during the hunt cornering the silver market type
Episode there and that was more excitement than I really needed and I tried to analyze
Why was I so uncomfortable and how do I stay true to trend calling while at the same time?
Dealing with the issue that I've got a position
That I want to let my profits run cut my losses short
But the position that I have now is moving all over the place by tens of thousands a day
On an account that just a few months ago was
Maybe 50,000 or a hundred thousand or something like that now it's worth
400,000 or 500,000 and it's moving up and down tens of thousands a day
That kind of opens your eye a lot and I realized out of that that there's no reason you can't stay true to trend following
And stay with the position. You just need to manage the position size
So all I did was figure out ways to volatility adjust and to risk adjust my positions ongoing
Throughout the trade so that things would become
Fairly tame and and the stomach lining would be kept very intact
there was nothing to get excited about because one day was roughly the same as every other day and
that's that's what I learned out of the early trading mistakes and
Situations where they really would have gotten to my stomach lining over my lifetime, but once we got to trend step days
We just automated a lot of that
That's to the point where you know
It just happened automatically and the only thing that would affect my stomach lining at that point would be a power outage or
You know the internet lines go down or you know, the program's not working properly or something like that
But certainly wasn't the markets anymore, you know
I've seen in many interviews that you've had and going back to our conversations. You've talked about how you would mentally rehearse
Catastrophic events and I guess if you've got a position on and it's the wrong kind of position if you're long and you don't adjust
And oil drops 50% that's a catastrophic event
And I saw a great comment from van Tharp and he talked about that
He got a phone call from you once and and you said that you had a disaster the prior day
And you couldn't answer the phone you couldn't talk to van, but basically you said it was a plan to disaster
So you've been thinking about is being a young man. It's like how do I plan for catastrophic events?
How do I plan for the unexpected because it's gonna happen
Right. Exactly. And I that was amazed at how many CTA's professional traders did not plan for disasters
We would once a year at least have it what I would call a disaster day and I would
Tell everybody ahead of time
So everybody in the company knew what to expect and I asked a little bit extra out of everybody and we moved a
Section of the company to our off-site location
To operate in an alternative mode and try to run the company from the secondary location
While a certain number of people stayed in the primary location to answer
Phone calls from clients and things that would come in that would be normal routine business
And we didn't want to have our disaster day exercise affecting
You know the clients being able to get to you know to us and schedule appointments or talk to us or something
With vans call for instance, that wasn't a hugely necessary. I absolutely I got to do this right today call
so I put him off because I was trying to make sure who did this exercise and
It required a whole lot of attention because when you're operating on backup equipment
It's it's a little bit more clunky than it would be with your mainstream stuff
So but what we did all day was we started then we we off-loaded data to the backup facility
We put orders in from the backup facility
We tried to call our trading desk from the backup facility
We tried to you know, look at procedures and things and modify things
So we have all the word files and Excel spreadsheets and different things that we needed to operate
I mean variably what you get out of those exercises is a there's a good list of things that you missed
or that have changed since last time you did a disaster backup and
You can improve and tighten your operations. I find it amazing to me that some CTI's just have a single operation and they
Don't have a clue. What would happen if they say the mobile phones weren't down or if
You know the internet goes down, you know, you lose electricity
One of your trading desks is no longer available for some reason
There's so many different scenarios. But if you've actually gone through some of them and actually tried to tell your trading partners
What you're doing. I always found that they were very very very excited in working with me to
Generate ways of operating in an emergency because they they have the same problem on their side
They want to know that I'm gonna be able to deal with what happens to me
And in some of these cases they were giving us money to trade. So we were trying to you know, be good partners
And I think that's something that you can do in a lot of aspects of life
It's amazing how many people just kind of let life put it to them
And then there's the stress of dealing with it as opposed to trying to say well
I could go this way and those following two or three things could happen or it might not happen and it might be this
And if it is, you know, do I go to plan B or do I try to solve that problem?
There's a lot of things you can do if you think ahead a little bit do a little planning
Do a little exercising and then it's not so stressful when it happens
Those catastrophic events though, it's not necessarily only what you've just described
Thinking in terms of catastrophic events is also about your portfolio your trading strategy. Sure. It is
And so to some extent, you know
They're probably the most catastrophic move that I ever saw was when we had written dated Iraq during the HW
When we went from Kuwait into Iraq
Those years when I was
Let's see closing down the markets. I think the oil was at $32 a barrel. We were long
By 8 o'clock that night. We had had a bit of a computer issue at the trend stat and I was staying late that night
I left having solved the problem at about 8 p.m. Which would have been well, you know, six hours or more after the close
And oil was up to $40 a barrel and we were rolling into Iraq
So I thought oh this is ought to be pretty nice and I go to sleep and I come in the next day
And oil is at $22 a barrel and we're you know
We're stopped out and take a chunk of a loss
I think we lost and all the portfolios about five or six percent of the whole portfolio that day
Which was to that day and to this day the largest single-day loss that I saw
in
Trading the futures markets. So I mean we made it back and we're at new highs
a month or two later three months later
It wasn't a big deal, but it was was wow
6% in one day. That's interesting
It wasn't something that was
Unusual because yeah, we we saw the market stand. It was a bad day, but we can recover from the 6% loss
It's not gonna hurt you and we had managed that position properly. It had gotten very volatile
So we were down to minimum sized positions
When it got down to 22 a lot of accounts couldn't even own a position because the volatility was too great
So we keep them out of the position all together
You know life was good and we like I said came back in their eyes shortly after
It sounds so simple, but I think for most people
That simple story can go right over their head and the big picture point there is that you're saying hey
Look, we've got to have chips to play the game
Our egos are not so big that we know what's going to happen next
So if the market's not going our way, let's take our losses get out and come back to play another day
Exactly, right. That's all it is. It's a it's how do you get to your next 1,000 or 2,000 or 10,000 trades?
It's all of matter statistics. Any one trade can either win or lose
Over time. I usually figured that we were around 33%
profitable and about 67% of the time unprofitable on trades and of course the winners were worth a lot more than the losers were
so it worked out but
Yeah, you got to come back and do those next
2000
So that you can get the 33% that are profitable and have to deal with the 67 that aren't
in every piece of media and of course
Media is not relevant to trend following trading
But if you if you look at media all media whether it's print
radio
online tv is all about
The trade for that day the trade for that day and there you just calmly and coolly say hey, hold on
I don't care about one trade. I care about a thousand trades into the future. That's what I want to be focused on
Something that van tarpett said a long time ago
And I remember it so well
Is a good day for a trader is following your strategy. In other words trying to get to those next
1000 trades and just doing what you do over and over again. It's not whether you made money or lost money today
It's whether you followed your strategy today and put on that next set of trades that you're supposed to have put on
According to your strategy and when you get into that mode then trading gets a little less exciting
Your stomach lining feels a lot better and you'll have more success
You've spent a lot of time in the last couple years
I think anyone that's it's been online has seen this is that you quite enjoy
Interacting with people and you're on twitter and you're on facebook and you weren't doing this a couple years ago
But now you do and I I know you you've given a lot of interviews and you've stayed connected with people and you clearly really
Enjoy it. I do think though what's interesting is that you have a definite political opinion
And i'm not necessarily curious about the political opinion. I know what it is
And I share a lot of those beliefs
But I think for some people they could see the political opinions and get confused
They could say well, well tom's got this strong opinion and they and they could somehow or another think your trading
Is living and breathing with your political opinion and it's not. Oh, not at all
my political opinion
Is that you know, I think just like trading where traders have to take self responsibility
Uh to be successful if you if you're blaming the guys on the floor for
Screwing you on the trade or if you're blaming your broker for giving you the wrong advice or whatever
You're going to fail. You got to take self responsibility. You have to be responsible for finally for you
Pulling the trigger on something and I think that's what I failed to see a lot throughout
Political life as well. There's a lot of finger pointing all the time
something happens and
You know so and so is blaming
Congress and so and congress is blaming the president and you know, everybody's blaming everybody else and I think
Without looking to themselves and saying what could they have done?
You see these parties involved to make that not happen or happen better or whatever and I think trading is the same way
and so I I
view a lot of my political
views come from that same bent
but it's certainly not
Yeah, it doesn't have anything to do with my trading my trading is just purely mathematical and uh,
It's the directions up. I want to be long if it's definitely I want to be short
It's not any more complicated than that
You know, i've had some i've had some traders on here this fall
current cta's
Running multi-billion dollar funds really interesting people to talk to and i'll get feedback
And they'll they'll come on the show and they'll say hey, we're price driven. We're 100
Systematic, this is what we do and i'll get these emails from people that they're like
No, you don't get it coval. There's a there's a secret fundamental overlay
There's discretion going on in the back room and i'm just
It still strikes me as funny as it's so many trend following traders just like you
Will come out and say this is exactly what we do
There is no fundamental input and people still think no
There's a secret sauce of human discretion that you don't know about mike and you're missing the point and you don't realize that
Basso has really got a huge fundamental step in the back
I don't have time. I got to move the five tons of gravel this afternoon
You know, you know, I think it comes down to people love to have
complicated things a lot of traders when they start out what do they do they go get
uh, kovell's book you get
You know schwagger's stuff you get all sorts you read read read read you get a lot of opinions about
all sorts of different ways of trading fundamental and technical and
There's a pattern in universe type stuff like elliot wave and and fibonacci and all that stuff and
You you just the poor trader starting out just looks at all this and
Just can't figure out what to do next and the human mind wants to make something
As important as making money in the markets a very complicated thing like
Tom's been around for a lot of years. So that's why he's so experienced and that's why he's successful
But the reality of it is, you know, simple things work the best
Swagger had a way of saying it there's degrees of freedom
In other words, the more things you add to a strategy
You start out with a simple moving average
Then you say i'll only do the bisignal and the moving average if the if the moon is in the right phase
And then you and then you add on that that you got to have it only on the open
Not any other time during the day and it's got to meet those criteria and start adding filter after filter after filter pretty soon
You won't do a trade you'll sit there and look at all this stuff and
You'll first of all be confused because you won't be able to process all that information in your poor brain
And then you'll miss out on trades because you just can't function. There's so much complicated nature
So you sit there watch the markets and wish that you could trade
You know and make some money and really simple things are very robust they will
There's very little about them that can fail because it's so simple
There's not anything but price price feeds your profits and it feeds your losses
So if you stay to price with all your strategies
You are strategizing
On that variable that feeds directly one to one your profits and losses
So you never get out of sync
If you're if you're over there looking at interest rates and trying to predict
stock market indices
You've got two different variables going on there the interest rates may agree with the stock market
They may not agree with the stock market. You could get caught sideways
Someplace, but if you're looking at stock indexes prices and you're buying and selling stock indices
It's one to one, you know, you're going to make money or lose money on what stock indices do and therefore
You never get out of whack. You're always in sync with the market and you don't have to stress out of it
You know tom you mentioned traders
and overwhelming amounts of information and confusion
And different strategies and you mentioned like elliott wave and whatnot
one of the things that I found really useful in wrapping my arms around strategies when I was
Just a new guy trying to understand as well was not to necessarily just trust
What tom basso has to say, but I would look at the performance data
And I could not for all the strategies out there in the quote technical space
I couldn't find any strategy that had this massive number of participants
openly putting their performance data out
Each month where you could compare those performance data and see that there was often some correlation
Maybe not exact, but there was some correlation and you could wrap your arms and say wow
Trend following has all these participants. They seem to be doing something similar. I feel comfortable about this
This is a useful piece of information for me
Whereas i've never been able to find that kind of overwhelming amount of data for any other technical strategy. It's only trend following
That's correct. And you'll find that the trend followers also tend to lose money at the same time and I did studies on
If you took the average volatility high low
range of
Various commodity markets over a month time and then looked at the performance of ctas in general
Over that same month you would find a direct correlation to highly volatile months led to
Larger cta profits and lower volatility months led to smaller cta profits or even losses
And so it made a lot of sense to me that if people are really trend following you want the market to go a long way
If it's sitting there in one place
You're not going to you can't make any money if the prices aren't moving
So it's a simple a simple study and a simple result and it
Said exactly the way it leaned exactly the way that I wanted when I thought it would lean
That was published someplace a long time ago
Makes sense doesn't it? I mean if the prices move
Then trend followers can make some money
I'm just amazed that so many traders will believe in some type of a strategy and they can't find other market participants
Actually using this so they they they decide on their lonesome
I have this one novel strategy and they must think in their own mind
Well, it's worth more to me because i'm the only one doing it whereas i'm like hold on
I want to see that some other smart people before me have done this
Well, that'd be nice
But so I I can't say that trend following is the only way that we could possibly make money in the markets
But this certainly is one that has been
Tried and tested by a lot of different, you know minds over the years. We've got to say that it's certainly uh
A sound way to approach things and to keep yourself from getting in harm's way too often much
Hey, let me i'm gonna have a couple more questions on you. I'll let you go move some gravel around
No, I mean i'm i'm off to yoga after while you're doing gravel i'm gonna do yoga. So
We'll see who sweats more
Hey years ago your firm did a study and people can still find that online and I think there's some big picture
Points to it that still are relevant to this day, which is the hot hand type issue and specifically for people that put money with
Trading managers and they often want to put the money with the manager
And specifically let's talk about trend following traders
But they want to put the money with the manager when they've had this great run and they
It's the human condition behavioral economics behavioral finance now, I want to give the money whereas I think in your study
Why don't you explain what you found out?
It's a little bit different than what people think well what I found out was that
The two studies together the the prices move
Therefore trend followers make money
So trend followers making money means their equity curve gets better and better. So the trends persist for maybe several months
Maybe the you know trend followers are now knocking it out of the park
So then all the money in the world starts rushing in and floods in there
Then the markets start stalling out of those trends
Trend followers go into a sideways or a drawdown
then at the bottom of the drawdown
at the
The pit of you know, the the trough of the equity curve at the low of the drawdown
The markets are now going sideways and are about to break out up or down or whatever, but they're just building pressure
Waiting for it to explode and that's when people are pulling money out just before the next big surge
And so what I found is that when you took the dollar weighted return, which is the actual
Returns that the ctas would have provided had you just put your money with them and left it alone
versus the
Excuse me the time weighted return. I got that wrong. The time weighted return was what the ctas would do
If you just left it alone
The dollar weighted return takes into account clients giving the ctas money at certain times and taking it out at other times
The time weighted return which is the cta's actual returns by their strategy were always better than
The dollar weighted returns of what the clients did in terms of coming in and going out
So clients were actually hurting their performance across the entire industry
And I forget whether it was a hundred percent of the cases or some very high percent. I believe it was at least 75 percent
I can't remember the exact study results now, but it was a huge
Overwhelming preponderance and certainly averaged over the whole industry
It was definitely hurting to have clients put their money in or take money out. They were hurting themselves
And I find so interesting and we might have even spoken about this before is that so many aspects of successful trend following trading
have
the
Understanding of behavioral economics behavioral finance and how to deal with biases and using heuristics to trade
Long before it was a popular subject long before the nobel prizes were handed out
There's this group of traders that were essentially while not promoting the idea that hey
We understand behavioral economics
We're effectively
Trading in a way where clearly they understood what all the academic research that was to follow in the decades to come
the turtles
Every I mean you I'm a you I've been all many your peers. Yeah. I mean it was just is fascinating, you know
Yeah, all i'm doing is saying, you know, it's crude oil markets going down
It's not up some time to figure out how or why it's going down. It's simply going down
It is
And and what would you want to be positioned today?
If you had your choice, would you rather be positioned in enjoying the downslide?
Or would you be trying to jump in saying low is low and maybe it's going up from here. I you know to me
You have to trend this down. I just want to be short and when it turns around goes the other way
I want to be long. I don't really want to think too much about it. I've got other things i'd rather think about
And I think that that's reacting to the behavior of a whole bunch of a whole market full of traders
That may or may not be using fundamentals or hedge techniques or whatever. They're using to make their decisions
But the aggregate all feeds into that price
Makes it go up makes it go down
So it's the it's the dependent variable
of all that behavior
decision-making of all of those rest of the market
And i'm just reading it in the price and going with it and not thinking too much more than that about it
You know what? I love that you just said is i've got and we can kind of
Go this direction with the rest of our conversation. I think it's some of the most important stuff. It's very personal
I got other things. I would rather think about and I think what that really says is
To people that are paying close attention. Hey, my name's tom. I have this system. I've done the homework
I've done the research. I know why it works. I'm comfortable with it
And then once it's in place and I put my machine in place
I'm not running around like a chicken with his head cut off
You know all nervous and antsy all day long and as you said I got other things i'd want to do
And I think what that really says though, too
Is that life is short and you've got to find ways to enjoy your time and have fun
But the idea of of sitting around and staring at a screen and talking trading all the time
Trading is just it's a useful byproduct of a process of a machine, but
I you know, I could tell you don't really care
It's not what you are. It's something you know how to do, but it doesn't define you
Yeah, I mean I I know how to golf but I don't consider myself necessarily
A one-dimensional golfer and I don't live and die or you know about whether I can get to the golfers
I haven't touched my golf clubs. Thanks to the cruise to tahiti
I haven't touched them in about three and a half weeks now
And i'm still enjoying life. I you know, it's not like I
Need to get over there and hit balls right after we get off the phone
I think a lot of people get into trading and they get addicted to that almost the gambling nature of it all
To me. It's just managing my portfolio
It the less time I can take to do it
The more time I have to move travel or talk to you or clean my backyard or you know, go hit golf balls
There's lots of things or take a cruise to tahiti
A lot of people won't take vacations because they're afraid they're going to miss something in the markets
I just take along my computer and I go do about 10 20 minutes a day on the
ship's
Satellite internet and i'm done
That's not too burdensome
You know what you just said there. I think it's so terribly important
So many people run their lives afraid they will miss something and I think that is what's happened in modern society
Is with especially with the media coverage. It's all built around a really
intense fear
Yeah, and I think they're going to miss something. So if they're making decisions based on what's at the side decide today
Then they're glued to the screens trying to you know, wait till what the shred decisions coming out
I've got to stop sitting there if the fed
Decision causes the market to go through my stop then I get executed
I find out about it when I close the markets down in the afternoon, which i'll probably do after our call
It's not something i'm going to sit here and want to you know, wait until the fed decides to publish their darn report
That means i'm sitting here all day long in front of a computer. That's not quality of life
But tom can't but can't you listen to the fed and and use some extra discretion to improve your trend following performance
No, I cannot
I cannot so I just don't
I did enough studies that in the early years that
Talked about what value did my discretionary decision making make and you know, overlaying it on trend following or anything
And I became clearly convinced that I was not adding any value. So therefore why I just fired myself basically
I love it. I love it
I mean, you know, I think it's so fun talking to you is because you just are so
You're so clean meticulous and precise about about your thinking about your process your system your machine
And I just know some people will listen and they're just going to go
Oh tom doesn't know that we can improve what he's doing. It can get better
Almost like the six million dollar man. We can we get better faster stronger
Well, that might be but we got to remember i'm 62 and retired and enjoying life
So I don't want to you know create a job out of this
Certainly there's things I could do to try to improve what i'm doing. I'm sure I
If I had a team of computer programs like I did back in the old days at trendstad
I I probably have a couple ideas I could work on but you know, it's just not
worth spending that kind of money and effort
And then trying to pick up a few extra percent here and there it's just not
What I do today. So I keep it simple and I keep it
Low fixed overhead and I have zero regulation fees at this point. I have
Very little to no chance of somebody suing me like I did in the old days
You end up with a low liability easy to run retirement type of investment strategy and that fits my situation and my dollars and my
expertise level and and that's what every trader should always get to is
Examine themselves and there's capital and their expertise design the strategy around
Those things not around what tom basso does or michael coval does or anybody else?
Everybody out there needs to do what they
Need to do for themselves. That's what creates the success because then they can
They can do it over and over again with ease
If you're trying to copy somebody else, you're just
You're not going to ever be at ease with that
You're always going to be trying to compare yourself to that person or trying to
Do things that are not in your expertise levels or maybe you don't have enough capital for or who knows?
But if you design what you're doing for yourself, then that's where success lies
We kind of talked about this last time a little I can I get emails from young people all the time and they want advice on
Where can I go to get hired in the cta space the trendpong space who will hire me?
What insight can you give me and I think stories like?
The turtle story for example has really created
And now this is the story is so well known people think well
This is going to be I can I can recreate this I can replicate this I if I can just get my toe in the door
Whereas I I think you have some different perspectives about the managed money space today
Why don't you talk about that and maybe offer some advice to a young person today that wants to trade
And maybe give an alternate view on ways to go about it versus the ways that people have seen in the last
20 30 40 years maybe
You might have a point that things have changed from your perspective and maybe there's another way to go about it
There's clearly if you took today's world and you took
tom personally me
I could not do today what I ended up doing back in the 70s and 80s
Starting up trendstad and becoming successful doing all that. I don't think that would be
A reasonable path to success in today's world. There's too many billion dollar money managers with extensive staffs
I have no idea what their criteria is to hire somebody but
I would dare say it'd be hard to get on with a lot of those folks. I imagine
And I think because of the regulation increasing the cost of doing business increasing
in the cta space an easier approach to learning how to trade is to
probably become your own trader and continue to
Work very hard at whatever it is that you
Did before training, you know your main job, so to speak. I was a chemical engineer in the old days
So work hard at chemical engineering, let's say
Save as much money as you can keep building your portfolio bigger and bigger and keep building your expertise in trading bigger and bigger
At some point you'll be making enough money
To uh, look at your trading success and say, you know
I'm making as much money off of trading as am being a chemical engineer. Maybe I don't need to be a chemical engineer anymore
And then you transition and then you're where I am right now
A trading full time. I think
The cta space has gotten to be very difficult to break into
And i'm really at a loss at this point partly because i've been out of the business for 11 years
But also just because I I can't quite see my way
Clear. How would you go about doing that? That's you definitely would need, uh capital infusions or partners that would
Be able to bring in sizable amounts of assets to trade
Be able to finance a staff of
Five or ten at least lots of you know phone systems the computers the regulatory environment all the prospectuses and
Some of those prospectuses you can blow 50
$100,000 really quickly
that would legal expense so
audits
Cpa fees it's it's getting to be a pretty tough game to just break into for a little guy operating out of the garage
But that doesn't take away from the fact that if you want to trade
Trade your money or friends and family or something to that effect that opportunity is wide open
You're you're not saying trading is tougher to break into you're saying
What we've all read about the managed money is tougher
The managed money is very tough today and the business of being a cta
Is tough trading your own money is free of regulation. It's very low overhead the commissions now
Where in the old days having being manager and you can negotiate your commissions and the retail public had to pay a higher
Brokerage fee now everybody plays those brokerage fees. So there's almost no cost to trading these days
And you really can as a small operator do things that the big guys almost can't do
I never used to trade orange juice a whole lot when I was at trend step, but I trade it now
Because I can
I'm small
I'm a small dollar size compared to what I used to be so I don't have to worry about it
I can go into markets that I didn't didn't go into before very much and
So I think there's you have to examine as an individual trader
Do you want to go and work in a cta?
Because you're trying to pick up expertise. Well, what if their expertise is
is bad, maybe
I mean I remember in the day john henry was one of the big guys say you got a job at john henry
Well, he was going up and down with 40 drawdowns. Yeah, he traded billions of dollars
I don't think what he was doing made a super amount of sense to me
I thought it was probably always going to lead to very large drawdowns and run-ups because he was more leveraged
And maybe if you go work for somebody like that
He's teaching you that type of stuff. You're learning bad habits, maybe so there's it's not a panacea to go to work for somebody else
And learn what they're doing. I think it's better for you to learn how to do it on your own and
trade your own stuff successfully and then
Then you're right where you need to be
You just need to try to find ways of getting worksheet capital to trade and that means
Working harder taking a second job doing getting a maybe a degree to get a promotion
You know getting that next rung up on the ladder in the corporate world so that we can have more money to put away
Tom great wisdom great wisdom
I I really like the way how you just laid that out the the lack of a panacea
I think a lot of people they dream and they fantasize about the panacea, but there isn't one
No, there isn't becoming a trader to to get to where I am right now where i'm trading my own account
Living off of it. That is something that is difficult enough to get to no matter where you
No matter where you're starting from unless you're starting from like a major inheritance
You've got all the money in the world, you know, that would be an easier time transitioning
But you're starting from where I started as a guy at a college with a four thousand dollar student loan and a chemical engineering job
And zero net worth or a negative net worth actually. I think you
You have to realize that it's a tough road no matter which way you go
Tom i'm thinking the best place to send people to check you out to maybe connect with you
Basso underscore tom, which is your twitter handle. Is that the best place probably facebook? I look at more. I put stuff out on
Twitter because then it's attached to facebook and it goes to both places
Uh, but those are usually my market directional calls
I try to do that to just keep my friends and family informed of which way i'm leaning
And it is what it is
I noticed I was what two three days late when I was down in tahiti on the cruise because of the bad bandwidth
So I had gotten a cell come in and then I got whipsawed on it because it made new highs again
Apologize for people who are trying to follow that but I recommend you don't follow it use it for what it's worth
But it's it's free and possibly worth about that much
And I think that uh, you have to do your own thing and create your own indicators, but
Find me on facebook is probably the easiest way. I see that probably quicker
Uh, I also tom at trendstop.com. My email address is fine. Send me an email
I just had one today from someone who had some questions and I answered them
inside of about six hours, so
Yeah, I do know a lot of people have
Responded to me and said hey tom's giving some great feedback
However, I I want to tell my audience out there for those of you that are crazy
It would make me look bad. If you are crazy, please don't contact tom
If you really are if you're not connected to reality and you're gonna and you're gonna ask really really weird questions
Please don't go there because it'll make me look bad and tom won't come talk to me anymore. No
I love talking to you michael
No, it's okay and I can if somebody's crazy I can figure that out pretty quickly myself
Well, hopefully we can catch up again in 2015 life's good. Take care of yourself. Michael. It's good talking to you


# Chapter 69

The most famous living psychologist the man who won a Nobel Prize for essentially prospect theory
For helping us to understand our behavioral biases
Daniel Kahneman and if you've not read his book thinking fast thinking slow go buy it today. I
Was looking at your career looking at all the research and findings everything behind what you've done and obviously we're not going to fill
It in on this conversation
But at what point in your life did you start to realize that you were comfortable?
Looking at the world people behavior from outside the norm
When did you first realize that you were looking at things from a different vantage point? I
think
Difficult question I like to get the hard ones right out of the gate
You know
One than both science, of course, you publish things because you think that they're new
We're what we didn't see was how far our research would be taken
So we studied a mister ski and I began our work by studying judgment on their uncertainty
You know a limited set of problems of judgment and we worked on that five years
And we wrote an article at the end of those five years in 1974, which was published in science
that article had a lot more impact and resonance than we had anticipated and
And it was really in seeing that reaction that we realized that we had done something
That was unusual because people were reacting to it and if it were unusual
So it was somewhere between 1974 and 1980
We became aware that people were taking this as new they were taking it as newer than we had taken it
Interesting. Yeah, it's it's it's for me in my world the world of money and markets
Your work is right there for me at least from where I come from is right there at the foundation
If if people were to say to me, hey Mike, what's the best way to learn about?
Making money in the markets or being successful in the markets. I would point them towards your work
I mean, I think it's a found it's it's one foundational element that if people don't wrap themselves around
The internal themselves
They're just not going to do very well. And I think you really I don't think you intended perhaps
To have so many people on Wall Street be thinking fondly of your work, but it so happened that way
Yeah, I mean this this all came this all really came as a surprise
We had not expected it. You know, there was going to be some reaction to the
Assumption of rationality into the dominance of the rationality assumption and in finance and economics
It happened that we provided
We provided an instrument that people inside the discipline could use to question
You know to question the dogma of rationality
it's actually quite it's an interesting anecdote how this happened and
And the reason why our work had impact because it's it's actually put it's accidental
Why our work had impact it had impact because of the way that we present our ideas and we present our ideas by
examples in the text of questions that people tend to get wrong and
So the readers who are not psychologists readers outside the discipline
They read this and they face those demonstration that work on them
And and it's when something works on you that you're inclined to change your views about human nature
Nearly getting data, but undergraduates with some other people responding to questions. There's very little to people
Yes, it's reading about others is one thing, but when you see the change internally on your your own self
That's when the magic the magic can happen when you see yourself making mistakes
Attempted to make mistakes then the idea that people
Generally, you know people who are as smart as you are attempted to make mistakes. That is a that's a discovery
It's it makes it much harder for people to distance themselves from the findings
And I think that it's this accident of format that caused our work to have the impact it did
I want to shift away from your early work as something that's been near and dear to you recently
And that's the subject of happiness
I mean, it's always been i'm sure it's always been near and dear to you
But I would love for you to get into something that I think
Can help people regardless of what they're they're interested in in their life
And it's the the idea of the remembering self in the experiencing self
And and that out of the gate might sound very academic to a just a regular audience listening
But I think it's a very important distinction that you've drawn. Why don't you just
Talk about the experiencing self and the remembering self out of the gate for sure. You know, there are many
Two types of questions that you can ask people about how happy they are so you can ask them. How do you feel right now?
You know, what is your mood right now?
And that is you know the self that answered this question
I call the experiencing self because it talks about what's happening right now
But when you ask people how was your vacation? How happy were you during your vacation?
How happy have you been over the last year or how satisfied are you with your life?
When you're asking those general questions, you're asking
For something entirely different you are asking persons. How do you feel about your life?
Now that you're thinking about your life, how do you think about your life how that makes you feel?
So how you feel as you're living
And how you feel when you're thinking about your life are two very different questions
And it turns out that you can measure
Well-being subjective well-being in both ways by asking people
to report on their experiences or by asking people to think about their life and evaluate it
and different factors turn out to be important for experience and for
life evaluation
But there's quite a bit of confusion between the two. I mean for example, I think you had a story about taking
photographs on a vacation. Well, yes, I mean
We seem to be
planning
vacations
in many cases and we plan our vacations as
constructing memories that we for use in later consumptions and photographs are symbolic of that but
in fact my argument has been that
if you look at it in terms of
how much time people spend
Consuming their memories
Then that is a negligible amount of time compared to the amount of time that they spend having experiences
And yet we put a disproportionate amount of weight on the consumption of memories
Well, i'm sure you've observed this you watch uh, you watch young people today
They've everyone's got a smartphone and it's a constant taking of pictures of themselves called selfies
And it seems like it seems like instead of living and experiencing the moment everyone is trying to capture
An artificial moment and capture a memory, but the experiencing is not there. I it's I don't know if you've you've probably noticed this yourself
well, I mean I don't do that but uh, but certainly the
The ability to record so many things that they are happening to you must be changing the experience of life because you're evaluating your
experiences as future memories
And and in a way when you're taking pictures of what you see you're adopting a different stance on on the experience itself
so
Certainly, this is having an effect what effect it has
At least I don't know. I haven't analyzed it. Yeah, I don't know what it's happening there. It doesn't seem like it's necessarily
good or bad is all relevant but uh
Or relative but let me jump I want to I only got you for a short amount of time
And I want to jump to a couple different areas that I think are really important to my audience
And some very strong
Thoughts that that sound very straightforward
But I think for example a quote of yours that i've seen a person who has not made peace with his losses
Is likely to accept gambles that would be unacceptable to him. Otherwise now that can have meaning
Far different fields, but in my world in my world of of trading of finance and money of wall street
That not making peace with a loss
is
This is the downfall of of so many investors and here you're coming at it
I don't imagine you were thinking through some of that work with investing and trading in mine, but it's
foundational
I mean every great every great trader knows what you just said is like that's like
Written on the wall in some form or another
Well, uh, of course we weren't thinking of uh, specifically of investors, but it turns out there is research that demonstrate this
So we know about traders how they trade in the course of the day and if they've been losing
Uh, they take more risks later in the afternoon
So, uh, that seems to be you know, the idea of
Uh not making you haven't made peace with your losses
That means that you're trying to make up those losses that tends to make you risk seeking
and uh, we do see a lot of evidence for that
And and it probably is costly to traders that are not
You know in the extreme cases people, you know traders who trade so much that they can't make
You know peace with their losses
Uh, some of them get caught up in cycles of fraud and you know, they become road traders
But those are the exceptions but traders who are not road traders do tend to
Daring the seeking depending on the history of what's happened to them during the day or during the year
Let me shift slight gears on you and talk about bubbles and crowd behavior
and
Generally, it seems and I know your research goes there but
That when people get together in crowds the decision making changes
Well, yes, I mean, you know, what what we see is
We are and that is probably biological, you know, ultimately it's biological. It's following other people so that
When you see a lot of people running in one direction
We are by and large wired to run in the same direction
Now a few very clever people
Will run in another direction, but the majority of us
You know, we see we see the herd moving one way we move with it
And that has large consequences, of course for market behavior
It by and large what it causes
It causes people
individually to do far less world than the market says they should because
they tend to come in too late when the market is rising and they can you know, and so the
People's timing is way off and as a result of trying to follow the the herd
They do much less
Well than they would do if they were basically adopting a policy and sticking to it
Is there anything else you'd rather be doing in your life than this?
I mean I look through your work and the findings and I just I just imagine you're terribly passionate about what you do
Well, yes, you know I've I now do other things, you know
I've retired from my academic career and I'm I now do consulting which I enjoy just as much or enjoy science
uh, you know, it's been it's been a fun career and the topic has been with fun and
When I started out this line of research, you know, like 45 years ago with a master's key
This was she a fun because he was a very funny
person with a
Marvel sense of humor and we were laughing over time. So we laughed for about 12 years doing doing our research
And what what made it funny was that we were studying our own biases and our own mistakes
Our point was not that people are stupid because we never thought that people are stupid and we never thought that we were stupid
But it's it's our own mistake in intuitions
We were studying and that that must have been the best fun I've had in my life those years of
Working on that topic. Yeah, because I mean I assumed the two of you were just
Just some degree off on your own island and just doing your thing and the rest of the world was was there but you were engaged
100 percent in in your endeavors and
I'm sure that feeling must have been great
Yes, it was I mean, you know, we were friends and
And for more than 10 years, I think we spent about half a day
Just together talking which is very unusual in scientific contribute the collaborations
So we had you know, we were extremely fortunate. We liked each other's company
And our topic was fun and our topic was one that could be
Studied while having a fun conversation that as you you examine your own intuitions you you raise puzzles
You see how the other response you develop theories and and puzzles and intuitions of the same kind
It was yeah, it was great to do
you know, I I watch leaders often leaders making public policy and
Near and dear to you is the topic of happiness that we just mentioned a second ago, but talk about happiness
Research and public policy. It seems like like we're listening
looking at the example of you and your partner at that time
And happy to go through this process and you're learning and you're you're finding all these new things out
But it seems like today. It seems like so many leaders when it comes to public policy
You don't ever hear anyone talk about happiness
It's just left out of the equation
I think that's not quite right. Actually
the official
You know the study of happiness
Is an official past within the UK government?
And the UK government the current coalition government put in subjective well-being
As as one of the objectives of policy and one of the measures of policy
So trying to keep a happy population is is rapidly becoming an accepted objective of policy
There have been you know major international commissions. This is the measurement of happiness is
Formal measurement of happiness is now
Routine
and part of policy in the UK and Canada in many European countries
In Australia things are beginning to move in this direction and even in this country. There is serious talk of
measuring
of
implementing measurements of well-being there are questions about how this is to be done and whether we are ready for the measurement and whether
Whether the measurement
And our understanding of happiness is mature enough to base policy on it. So there there's room for debate about that
but
That that there is increasing recognition of the role of well-being policy. I think is beyond doubt
Let me go at a few more topics with you
emotion
so much emotion individuals
driven by possibility and not probability
I think that's that's probably intuitive
But it's not necessarily when it comes to decision making being driven
by possibility versus probability
leaves us with some
Not great results often, doesn't it?
well, I mean
I suppose that what you're talking about is hope and fear
and uh
so when you're looking at you know, at
Entrepreneurial activity it is we have argued largely driven by optimism
So that when people take risks, at least that's you know, that's my main understanding of risk
Is that much of the time when people take risk? It's because they don't know the odds that they're facing
They're actually deluding themselves
So in in my view of risk takers
Um
They are on the one hand loss of those they hate to lose but on the other hand they are
Optimistic quite often to a delusional degree so that they don't really know the true probability
that they face of losing and
That's uh, that's that's the combination that produces risk
risk-taking but it's mainly driven by optimism and
And you can see that in entrepreneurs you can see that in people with discoveries
And are trying to bring them to market. You can see that in people who
Start small businesses, you know the average small business in the United States
There is 35 survival after after five years as I recall
But most people start a new business
Assign themselves a probability of 80% or higher to be successful
So it's that delusion that keeps them going and i've called optimism the engine of capitalism because uh,
It is in that sense very beneficial to society
But many people would not be taking the risk they take if they knew the risk they're taking
You know, obviously you've had a major dent
in
thought and people
Investigating the issues that you've laid out understanding believing knowing it's true
How much of a dent though? I'm curious. Do you think
That something like prospect theory how much of a dent?
Has it really made in the sense? I mean obviously you've made a dent but
The acceptance because when I look at I look at uh, for example, you can look at the current u.s
Equity market right now. I have no idea if it's fairly valued or not fairly valued
But we can all observe in the last 15 years
Some quite fantastic bubbles and some quite fantastic bus
I don't really think that
Uh the advances in behavior economics and behavioral finance and i'm i'm a customer
I'm not a producer of that and i'm really not an expert, but my impression is that
Very bright people are working on this very bright people are trying to develop theory
But it's early days of behavior economics and behavioral finance
When you say has it made a dent?
uh
Well, the answer is clearly yes, because
In some of the major economics department and finance departments in the land
Have behavior economics and behavioral finance as a central part of their curriculum
You know the Harvard economics department when are the best in the country?
There are you know, some of the major stars there are behavior economists and some and the best students are going there
Many of the best students are going there
So that you know that it has made a dent because what graduate students are doing is telling you something both about the recent past
and about the
The near future the near future there's going to be a lot of behavior economics going because many very bright scholars are going into the field
Yeah, I I should probably clarify myself
I obviously was not trying to say it hasn't made a dent, but I guess I was thinking more
about
the more established field of economics the the more rational the more rational side of the coin where
where you're coming in from a different perspective and there's
There's always going to be that conflict between the two. I mean there is you know, I mean
there was something almost funny about the last nobel prizes that were given because
uh
The Nobel prize in economics was given to two people both of them students of finance
With radically different ideas so that you have Eugene farmer who is a traditionalist
And believes in the rational agent model believes quite passionately about it and in the rationality of markets
and on the other hand you've got bob schiller who is uh, you know who speaks about irrational exuberance and
And doesn't believe in the rationality of markets. So both of these currents are alive and well within finance
My sense was that
There is a lot that the younger people
May be drifting in the direction of behavioral finance, but i'm not sure this is an impression that I get
Can I can I get you to go back to your really early years for a moment?
We've only got a few minutes left, but I would love for you to
To go back to as a young man because I think when people listen to
People that have had some achievement in their life and and they they've gone down certain paths
It's always nice to kind of look back and say well, can I relate to that person?
Okay, you know, it's it's very difficult to relate to somebody that maybe receives a nobel prize
But can you relate to that man as a young man?
And I'm wondering if you might talk about maybe some of your early experiences and I think there's one experience and I believe it
was in
France and I believe it was with a german soldier and you
You walked away from that
Changed. Yeah, I mean I kept that great experience. I mean it was during uh during the war. Uh, I was seven years old
1941 in occupied France France occupied by the germans
And they were beginning the you know, they had their measures against jews. It wasn't
extermination yet, but they were getting ready
And so the jews were supposed to wear a star of david a yellow star of david
And there was a curfew for jews and I was first grader or second grader probably
and uh
And I was playing with a friend and I went past the curfew
And so I put my sweater inside out
And and walked home and then near home in a place. I still remember
This was in paris. Uh
There was a German soldier facing me and uh walking towards me and he was wearing a black uniform
Which I knew although I was only seven years old was a bad one because it was the SS
That were wearing the black uniforms
And uh, and he approached me and I you know, I must have been shaking it
Don't you know, I don't remember every detail, but what I do remember is he stopped me he called me
And and he picked me up
And and he hugged me and I remember being terrified that he would he would see the yellow star
Uh inside my sweater as he was hugging me and then he put me down and he opened his wallet
and uh
Look at the picture of a little boy and showed it to me and then he gave me some money and I went home
And it was the complexity of that experience that he was a man, you know, who was clearly
a great
medium and
Perhaps eager to kill people like me, but there he was. He was a son. He loved his son. I reminded him of his son
uh
So yeah, that it was
The kind of experience or the complexity of human beings that have guided me is you know
It has inspired I think a lot of my work
uh
I've been curious about people all my life
Yeah, I I'm I I think a lot of people might be envious when they if and I
Highly recommend them to take a look at some of your books
But it's it's such a fun topic to be an observer of the human
Condition just to to watch people to observe
And then to find things out that maybe you didn't expect to see
That's such a fun process
Oh, yes, that's what I was saying. It has been a fun career
Well, listen, I I don't want to keep you you were kind enough to take some time out today. I will go ahead and
Point people to any place you might want. It might just be amazon to check out one of your books
I know you're not trying to sell anything or promote anything people can go check out
Thinking fast and slow is one book. I know there's there's quite a few
It's really is the only one that is
That was written for the public and you know, it's still there. It's actually on the bestsellers list
It has been for since it was published, I think
So, uh, it's easy to get it's 299 on kindle. I don't know what amazon serves it like that
But that's how they sell it. Anyway, that's that's the book in which I I told the whole story
Of uh, my research and and related research with other people it's not an also biographical book
It's a book about about thinking and decision making
Well, I love it. I mean I just I love the topic. I think it's so foundational to my audience
And I still think there's probably some people out there that they say well mike you're you you've gone off the deep end
Well, why does this uh, why does this gentleman at princeton or what? What is what is the relevance here?
I think some people just don't get it
But there's there's quite a few that do and I think they're they're appreciative to to be turned on to new ways of thought and thinking
So I appreciate all your work and I appreciate you taking the time today
Thank you very much for having me. Take care


# Chapter 70

Robert Allman is not a trend-following trader, but he has a Nobel Prize in game theory.
And game theory definitely connects to a trend-following philosophy.
I got my first degree at City College of New York, and I did a doctorate at MIT.
After that, yes, it's true, after that I did a post doctorate at Princeton, two years.
Yeah.
And that's where I was going.
What I was going at was at Princeton.
That was where you had a chance to either meet or hear John Nash, and that was your first
exposure to game theory.
No, that's also not quite correct.
My first, I met John Nash not at Princeton, but at MIT, where I did my doctorate.
Nash had left Princeton at that time already.
Nash had left Princeton, he did his doctorate, and he came to MIT in 1954, if I'm not mistaken.
No, in 1953, in fact.
He came to MIT in 1953 after completing his doctorate at Princeton, and I was at MIT between
1950 and 1954.
In 1954, I went to Princeton, but Nash was no longer there.
However, I did meet Nash and interact with him while in the academic year, 1953-54,
and we were both at MIT.
OK.
Well, I was just trying to lay some background and excuse me if I got a few dates off, but
I just wanted to kind of for the audience to let them know a little bit of your background
before we get into just to let you, look, I've got a fairly sophisticated audience, but
when it comes to game theory, and you know this all too well, there is a certain amount
of effort that you've put into your career to go down this path.
What I'd like for you to do from the very beginning is perhaps to talk about what game
theory is trying to accomplish, and also as you're explaining that, talk about the idea
of rationality.
I think the way you talk about rationality, sometimes these days people say, oh, it's
irrational, it's rational.
I think what's really interesting when I read your work is how you say, hey, hold
on, rational is not necessarily ethical or moral.
So perhaps you could touch on some of these basic issues before we jump in.
So let's address that question first, and afterwards we'll get back to the question
of what is game theory trying to accomplish.
So actually I have an article with exactly that title, what is game theory trying to
accomplish, but first let me face this issue of rationality.
Rationality from the point of view of economics, the economic definition of rationality, and
this applies to all interactive situations, not only economic ones, but also political,
international business.
Rational means a person is rational if he promotes his own goals to the best extent
of his knowledge.
As far as he knows, he is promoting his own goals.
Given his knowledge, he is promoting his own goals.
That's rational.
It's not logical thinking, it's not science, it's not any of that stuff.
It's not the daily use of the word, something else.
And the student of mine put this very nicely.
He gave an example of a person who's walking along the street and a black cat crosses
his path and he spits.
So according to the usual definition of rationality, he's superstitious and he's acting irrationally
by spitting.
Why spit when a black cat crosses your path?
It's a superstition.
So that's irrational.
But according to the economic definition of rationality, he is, in fact, irrational if
he does not spit, because by spitting, he is, according to the best of his belief and knowledge,
he is promoting his goals, which means because otherwise he believes that something bad will
happen to him if he does not spit.
So if he does not spit, he's acting irrationally.
This is the difference between the definition of rationality as it is in economics and game
theory and in everyday problems.
Let's get back to your first question.
What is game theory trying to accomplish?
Game theory is an analysis of interactive situations in which people are striving to
show entities, not necessarily people, different entities interact with each other.
What each one does affects what the other one gets and each one is trying to promote
his own goals.
So each one is rational, he's trying to promote his own goals and he's taking into account
that the other players are also trying to promote their goals, not his goals, but their
goals.
Going back in time, I think it's really interesting in looking at your work, discussions of Cold
War diplomacy, current international relations, and I was thinking the idea of a strategy
matrix because people make the point before we would always know what we can do.
But now the idea is to think what we can both do and put the shoes on at the same time.
The idea is that in analyzing an interactive situation, again, it's important to analyze
it from above, not from your point of view, what should I do, but simultaneously, given
the possibilities that are open to all the participants, all the players in this game,
what possibilities are open to them and what should each one do given the possibilities
that he has and that the other one has.
He must take into account that each player must take into account that the other player
is also maximizing, is also trying to do the best that he can for himself.
That's the idea of the strategy matrix and like my colleague, Tom Schelling said, just
this way of looking at things rather than what should I do saying what should we both do,
what is good for him, what is good for me, what is good for him given what is good
for me and so on, looking at it symmetrically, not only two players, also more players, this
is one of the essential important ideas of game theory.
And your career is about bringing mathematical tools to that end.
Yeah, my mathematical tools for thinking about these things, yes.
Conceptual tools, I don't like the word mathematics, yes.
I mean, it's a beautiful word and I'm a mathematician, I'm proud of it, but mathematics
is not the point, the point is thinking about this coherently, okay.
Thinking about it coherently and developing tools, conceptual tools to formulate these ideas
and then eventually to analyze them, okay.
Physicists, all kinds of scientists use mathematics and we use mathematics also, but mathematics
is a tool, it's not a end in itself.
Professor, let me, can I jump into a few kind of examples that I think my audience can relate
to.
Geopolitics gives some great ways where we can go in a discussion of game theory and I
think there's current situations in the world today that are fairly hot and for example,
we're talking about rationality and when I look at the media coverage of something
like Ukraine and Vladimir Putin, people might say, well, here's the irrational and my thought,
hold on, he's being perfectly rational for his situation and yeah, and I think that's
probably-
I think I ran also, I think a even more apt example, people often say that, Dachmanin
and Jidab is irrational, he's crazy and so on, he's not crazy, he doesn't do what
we want, but he's not crazy, he's highly rational and I think one should, one has
to take this into account, absolutely and as you say Putin also, by the way, I have
my doubts about American policy in the Ukraine, I think if one wants to maintain
world peace, I think Putin's reaction to Ukraine is in a way, maybe not only
rational but also understandable, okay, let's put it that way, we would not be
very happy if in Mexico, somebody suddenly Putin suddenly made a Russian
revolution in Mexico or in Canada, yes, it's not, I think there are accepted
spheres of influence, the Ukrainian revolution is walking the boat.
As we talk about conflict, geopolitics, I saw you make some comments and it's
very logical and very, it makes perfect sense, I think people don't want to
accept this and I'm paraphrasing a little so forgive me, but if you want
peace, prepare for war, if somebody sends a shell over at you, send a shell
back, if you're ready for war, there's no fight, if you cry peace, you end
up fighting, but you look at that not only just in opinion terms, you get into
the game theory is getting at those types of ideas, like as you say, with the
conceptual framework. You know the Rome, you know, when you look at the search
for peace, President Obama got the Nobel Peace Prize in 2009, Obama is a
smart kid, he made a speech in Oslo on the 10th of December 2009, accepted
speech of the Nobel Peace Prize in which he said the belief that peace is
desirable is rarely enough to achieve it. This was an understatement and he
understands the, he understands very well the mechanics of these things and
what he was saying is just saying, yelling peace, peace does not only
does not necessarily bring about peace, it may bring about war. We all want peace,
nobody wants peace more than we here in Israel do, but also Americans and
Europeans and everybody wants peace. The question is exactly what Obama said,
the belief that peace is desirable is rarely enough to achieve it. Wanting
peace doesn't get you peace, okay? What gets you peace? Well, who are the world
champions in peace? The world champions, who are, when I want to play good
soccer, I go and I go to Germany and I, they are the world champions in soccer
and I see how they play, okay? If I want to play good baseball, I see who won the
last world series and I look at their strategies. If I want peace, I go and I
look at the world champions of peace in all of history. You tell me, who
are the world champions of peace in all of history? Where is there? Where is
there any enduring peace? That doesn't happen, does it? There is no enduring
peace. Where is there enduring peace, really? Well, there are places where there
isn't enduring peace, yeah. For example, Switzerland, okay? Right? Little
country? Yeah, they've been at peace for several hundred years. That's quite
something. They have a great location, they know how to ski, and they have guns.
Ah, I think it's not that important here. Yeah. Although the place of role, yeah, and the
location is also a lot of places have good locations, yeah, and they're not at
peace. They have guns, they have guns, they have jet planes, they have holes in
the mountain. I often vacation in Switzerland. Vacation in Switzerland,
whether it's in the winter or in the summer, you have the jet planes
screaming overhead. What the hell do they need jet planes screaming overhead for?
Why do they need fighter planes, yeah? Nobody's bothering them, right? Why do they
need fighter planes? Why? It's crazy! Spend all that money that people
spend a month every couple of years in military duty and reserve service. The
reason is that that's why nobody bothers them, okay? And I'll give one
more example. The biggest, after the Swiss really have had several hundred
years of peace, but in a big way, the biggest champions of peace in world
history are the Romans. The Pax Romana, the Roman peace lasted for 239 years. 239
years, the whole Western world was at peace. Never, you know, nothing, it's
unbelievable, yeah, but that's what it was. And you know what their motto was?
Their motto was, see this pakan, parabellum, which means if you want peace, prepare for war.
That's what it means. And that preparation for war is in tanks, it's in guns like you said,
it's in jet planes, it's in drones, in whatever you want, but not only there.
It's in another place also, it's in your head, and you have to be willing to say, and you have to
mean it, you have to mean it. You know what, fellas? We want peace. But if you want to fight,
let's fight, okay? And if you can say that and mean it, then you don't have to fight.
One of the things I wanted to jump into was the 2008, 2009 bailouts, the rescues. And you know,
obviously, these types of things always invite the next crisis. But from your perspective, you
know, your wisdom, and maybe looking at this from a game theory conceptual framework, how do you
look at the bailouts, the rescues that happened during that period of time?
Well, bailouts are not a good thing. It's just like you said, it gives the incentives
to companies to take risks, because if I take a risk, and if it works out well, you put the
money in your pocket. And if it works out poorly, you'll get bailed out. So you won't make any money,
but you won't lose any money. So it distorts the incentives. Incentives are to take more risks
when bailouts are. On the other hand, when you have big firms, you know, control a lot of the
economy. A failure of a firm like that can really spell trouble. So, you know, I don't want
a second guess for Mankie. You know, it could be that at least some of these bailouts were
not a good thing, but they were something bad that had to be done to prevent the worst
from happening. And I don't want to go all around, but in principle you're quite right that bailouts
are a bad thing, you know, because they give the wrong incentive. The answer is not to have too
much of the economy in the hands of a small number of firms. Maybe that's easier said than done,
but that's the principle to strive to, so that you don't have to make bailouts,
the company fails. And that will create the incentives to be careful, okay,
not to take undue risks, which I think you've got to do that through incentives,
not through regulation, okay. You can't go and say to a bank, or you can, but you shouldn't go and say
to a bank, hey, you can't lend more money, or you can't have a leverage rate over such and such.
You shouldn't do that. The bank should sell its own leverage rates. It's important to have
transparency. In other words, they have to say, hey, this is my leverage rate, and this is how
much I'm lending, and this is the one lending, and so on. It's very important to have transparency.
But beyond that, I don't think these things should be regulated for. But, you know, like I say,
sometimes you've got to do things which are not optimal either. The main thing is to maintain
competition. This is very, very – regulation should be limited to maintaining competition,
which means not having too many, too few large firms controlling the economy,
and of course, to honesty, transparency. That's what regulation should be limited to.
I know you said you don't want to second-guess Bernanke. I won't ask you to do that, but
I'm imagining there's a side of you that deep in your stomach just doesn't like what happened
in terms of the bailouts and the rescues. And I'm curious if there's a side of you
that would have been curious to see what would have happened. Would it have truly been a meltdown or?
You know, I don't know. I don't know. How can you tell? How can you tell? I don't know.
I don't know. Like I said, you're quite right. Yes, there's something deep down inside me that
doesn't like to play well. You're quite right, and I set that forth in my previous statement.
But I can understand that somebody was really running the show like Bernanke was. You've got
to be a little careful, yeah, not to probably be a little careful, not to wrap the boat too much.
Behavioral economics. Quite a few advances, if one could say. In the last 10, 15 years,
some Nobel Prizes handed out. But I've seen you make the comment about artificial lab setups
and not liking that. I wonder if you might expand some on your perception of behavioral economics,
how you see it, limitations, pros cons. First of all, there hasn't been a number of Nobel Prizes
in one. Okay. One, Danny Kahneman. Okay. There hasn't been a number. Well, one is a number,
of course, but let's set that. I guess you could say Vernon Smith, though. And that Nobel Prize
is very interesting, because it's not really a Nobel Prize. Like my Nobel Prize,
it's not a full Nobel Prize. It's half a Nobel Prize, right? I shared my Nobel Prize with Tom
Schelling, so I got half. Okay. And Danny Kahneman also got half of the Nobel Prize.
Now, let's look at the other half. Okay. What's the other half of that Nobel Prize?
An O2. The other half is Vernon Smith. Okay. Now, what did Danny Kahneman show?
Danny Kahneman showed, together with Amos Tversky, that people really behave irrationally.
They don't behave in accordance with the dictates of economic theory. They behave,
they have certain rules of behavior that come on their, just anchoring, endowment effect,
representatives, heuristics, all kinds of things like that. Yes. Now,
that's what he showed. People do not behave in accordance with the economic theory.
And he did it with polls, with questionnaires, with lab experiments, that kind of thing.
And what about the other half? What about Vernon Smith?
Got a little less press, yes. What about his part of the Nobel Prize? Well, it's very interesting
because he showed the opposite. He showed that economic theory does work. He did lab experiments
on people, and he turned out that economic theory works just fine. And he himself was
surprised, yes. You read his Nobel speech, you find that he himself was surprised to find how well
economic theory works in the laboratory. One guy shows that economic theory does not work,
and the other guy shows that economic theory does work, and they share a Nobel Prize. I mean,
you know, you could understand the Nobel Committee saying we believe one or we don't believe the
other. But you can't say we believe in both of them. We're going to give both the Nobel Prize.
That doesn't seem to make sense. So what's the answer? What was going on over there?
And the answer is that the Nobel Prize was not given for the conclusions.
It was given for the methodology, which was new in economics. Not actually entirely new,
because experiments were carried on in game theory and in economics for many decades.
But these two guys, Vernon Smith and Danny Kahneman, who's a good friend of mine,
they really brought it to full flower, one might say. There were other people also, yeah.
But those two were chosen by the Nobel Committee to represent those two sides.
The prize was given for the introduction and use of this methodology, okay, which was an important
methodology in economics. I think the committee wanted to emphasize this. But still the question
remains, how can they have shown opposite things? Yes, how can they have made convincing cases
for two things that contradict each other? And the answer is that they don't contradict each other.
They are both basically right. Both Kahneman and Vernon Smith are right. Now, how can that be?
And he is now going to tell you how it can be. Kahneman took the exceptional case,
okay. He showed that in exceptional cases, people behave irrationally. Or let me put that more
precisely. He said that people develop rules of thumb. Treske and Kahneman call these rules of
thumb heuristics. They develop heuristics. People do not make explicit calculations. They do not
optimize. Rather, they develop heuristics for how to act in the real world. And these heuristics
usually work fine. They usually give optimal results. They usually give results that are
rational. Not that the process is rational, but the results are rational. And the heuristics
are chosen because the results are rational, usually. And they say this themselves in their
original 1974 article in the magazine Science, they said these heuristics usually work fine.
But occasionally, they misfire when they are misapplied, when they are applied to
unusual situations, which the practitioner, the man in the field, the subject of the experiment
is not used to, then they may give, and often do give systematically irrational results.
And Ron Smith, what he showed was that when you take the usual case, the situation to which
the heuristic is meant to apply, and when you do that, then economic theory works fine.
So their results do not contradict each other at all. First of all, they didn't get the prize
for the results. They got the prize for the methodology. And second of all,
their results do not contradict each other. And I fully go along with that stuff. Yes,
I go along with Smith and with Kahneman because I say that, right, people do not consciously
optimize. They develop heuristics for dealing with all kinds of situations. And these heuristics
usually work well. I call it rule rationality. They develop rules of behavior. And the rules are,
as a rule, they are rational. So that's my response to that question.
Listen, I have one more question for you, if you can. And I want to kind of go back in time a little
bit. And I've seen in going and preparing to talk to you, we talked a little bit about it yesterday,
which is the idea of professional diplomats. They don't really think in terms of payoffs and
outcomes. But I would like for you, and maybe even to use a historical example,
something like the Cuban Missile Crisis, and how that crisis, how game theory entered
that crisis, how the conceptual frameworks that have become part of your life, entered that crisis.
And if you could comment on something, look, it's a big subject, we could talk for a long time,
I could pick your brain all day about that subject. But I wonder if you might be able
to give a big overview in a short bit of time. Tom Schelling, in his Nobel acceptance speech,
that speech was called The Amazing Sixty Years. And this was in the winter of 05,
no, sorry, in December of 05, late fall of 05. And so the Sixty Years was started in 1945.
And what was amazing about that period from 45 to 05 is something that did not happen.
And what did not happen was that an atomic weapon was not exploded in anger for 60 years. 60 years
appeared in atomic weapons in the international arena, and not once was an atomic weapon
exploded in anger. So that was the title of his Nobel acceptance speech. And Tom himself had
a lot to do with that, because he was a game theorist, and he was an influential
figure in Washington during much of that period. What was going on really in the Cold War?
What made it happen that those 60 years, those amazing 60 years really did happen,
yes, or did not happen? Yes, that event that he was talking about did not happen. What
was that about? Well, a lot of people during that period were for nuclear disarmament,
okay? And there was a lot of talk about a lot of agitation for nuclear disarmament
during that entire period. I remember being in Cambridge, Massachusetts,
and seeing a bumper sticker on a car that said,
one nuclear explosion could ruin your whole day. And of course, that was meant to be amusing,
and it wasn't amusing, yet a nice quip. But it was symptomatic of the agitation that was
during that entire period for nuclear disarmament. Now, the truth is that what kept the world from
entering into the abyss of turning the Cold War into a hot war, what kept the world from that
was the presence of nuclear weapons. It is paradoxical, I mean, it's paradoxical
that the presence of nuclear weapons can, not to disarm, the armament, can prevent a Holocaust.
How did that happen? What was it that prevented World War III? What prevented World War III's
that is at first, you know, I would say over 40 years old, just well over 40 years,
somewhat over 40 years, and so about late 40s to late 80s. 40 years, there were
bombers carrying nuclear weapons in the air, in the air, 24 hours a day, 365 days a year for 40 years.
365 days a year, including crystals. So all the time there were
nuclear bombers in the air, and that's what prevented the war, okay? That sounds funny,
to have bombers in the air, and that's what prevents the war, but that is what happened,
and that's game theory, okay? That is game theory, and I think that played a role in the
human missile crisis also, probably, and the human missile crisis was a very, very serious
affair. I thought the world was coming to an end, you know, might very well come to an end. Not
in a year, in two or three weeks, yeah, it was very, very serious. Kennedy, well, you know,
I'm not sure that I would have had the guts to play it the way he played it, but
he did. Cooler heads, namely a krooster of treetail, and it came out okay, came out okay.
I think another interesting insight from that period was the shelter
construction, fallout shelter construction craze in 1960,
61. That was before the human missile crisis. There was a craze of building fallout shelters
in the United States. People would build these shelters, and they would equip them
with food and drink and so on, and also machine guns to keep, not to keep the Russians out,
but to keep the neighbors out. And this continued for a period, I don't know,
several months or a year or two, then it died down. Now, this fallout building,
shelter building craze created a very serious detente between the United States and Russia.
Do the Russians consider this an aggressive act? Now, how can a building a fallout shelter be
considered aggressive? But you see, for this you need gang theory. When you build a fallout shelter,
you are reducing your vulnerability. That's the word I was looking for. You are reducing your
vulnerability to attack on the other side. But the attack on the other side is just like I was
explaining up to now, is that's what was keeping the peace. So this was considered an aggressive move.
Okay, I hope this has been helpful. Yeah, it's great. I appreciate you taking the time today.
It's a privilege. And I think you probably lived your life like this, giving back to other
people and teaching. I feel privileged to have had a little bit of time with you to learn
in the last couple days. So I thank you. Okay, my pleasure. Thank you. Be well. Be well.


# Chapter 71

Anders Ericsson is the man who figured out practice.
If you practice and the right kind of practice, deliberate practice, you can achieve almost
anything.
It's paramount for any type of success, including trend following success.
Let me jump in with my first observation.
This is just kind of a big picture idea to get the audience into the direction where we're
going to go, but I don't know if you saw the news the other day, and of course you follow
a lot of sports figures, but Stephen Curry is probably the best basketball player in
the NBA today.
He's not a very big guy, so not huge physical attributes or anything, but he has hit three
pointers like they're going out of style.
And the other day he just, you know, just rocketed up.
I think he hit 12 in one game, which was an NBA record, and I posted something on my
Facebook.
I said, wow, this, and I just finished reading Peak, and I said, this is all a result of
deliberate practice.
And immediately somebody jumped in and said, oh no, he was born with it.
His father played in the NBA.
It's the genes.
And I thought to myself, I wonder what the professor would say.
I think we know of a number of father and sons that were successful in sports.
And I guess it kind of raises the issue here of, you know, why does that happen?
And I think there are basically, you know, two sort of extreme accounts.
One would be, you know, that you're born with the genes that allow you to do it.
And the other one is that you're basically born to a father who very early on helps you
basically guide your practice in such a way that once you reach adolescence and adulthood,
you've now had this practice history that can explain now your superior performance.
You've spent your adult life, and you say this clearly, studying the secrets of extraordinary
performers.
I mean, this has been your passion.
How do you go back in time and let the audience start to understand how this became your passion?
What were the triggering moments early in your life, if there was probably more than
one triggering moment?
But if there's any particular moment where you really would have started to have for
yourself the aha moment of like, wow, I really want to go down this practice route,
this deliberate practice route, where did that start for you?
I think I would go back to pretty almost high school where I guess I was, and I think a
lot of people are interested in trying to understand how they can get better.
I was interested in reading biographies and look at people who I really admired.
And I guess as I started my doctoral work, I kind of wanted to understand the thinking,
to kind of find a method that could tap into what the experts were thinking when they were
exhibiting this superior behavior.
And I think that was kind of the key step here, because at that time, there wasn't really
all that much work.
People were very skeptical as to whether people actually could report anything relevant that
could explain sort of their superior performance.
What I found was that when I studied task after task, people were reporting information
that really helped to understand how they were able to, you know, achieve a higher than
average performance.
Now, the next step, I guess, was when I was invited to go and work with Herb Simon
who later got the Nobel Prize when I was a postdoc in his lab.
The reason why I came to him was to really kind of put the ways that people express their
thinking when they're engaging in activities within a theoretical framework that would help
us sort of relate that information to models that could regenerate superior performance on
various tasks ranging from chess to mental multiplication and other kinds of activities.
And then I kind of started working with one of the senior professors at Carnegie Mellon
University where Herb Simon was at the time.
And we were interested in, is it possible for people to change sort of your capacity?
And at that time, people thought that your short-term memory, how much you could think
about at a given time, was really capacities that couldn't really be changed.
And one way to study individual differences in that capacity was to read people a series
of numbers and see how many numbers would they be able to repeat back perfectly.
What they found was, you know, was around seven, which is, I guess, a phone number
pretty much.
That's it.
Just seven at that time.
Well, that was sort of the average performance.
If you put somebody into a lab situation and read them a series of digits, they were basically
able to get seven numbers 50% of the time.
So that was kind of their limit.
You know, they would be even better if you only read them six digits, and they would
be virtually perfect if you only read them five.
But basically, the number of digits that you could hold on to and report back exactly
in order was on the average seven.
And I guess there's a famous paper that says seven plus nine is two, so basically something
between five and nine kind of captured what average people could do.
We then started to ask the question, if you keep people practice on that particular
task, can they actually improve performance?
What we found was we found a volunteer, and that volunteer, after about 40 hours, was able
to do over 20 digits.
So basically, by now collecting what were reports on what changes and his thinking processes were
developing along with his increased ability to do this task, we got a better understanding
here on how people could improve their memory in this particular task.
And with even more training, he got it so he could actually recall sequences up to 80 digits.
And we trained his, basically a friend of his, and he was able to get over 100.
And we'd studied some people now recently in China, who at the time had their world
record, and they're able to do over 300 digits.
At this time, were you starting to, was the insights as to how to break through those
thresholds, those were starting to piece together for you and your team and your associates
at that time?
Yeah.
And I think that was kind of a key insight that came actually a couple of years later
when people were starting to ask me, you know, I mean, who cares if you can remember
digits?
So, okay, you've shown here that this performance, which seems incredible, is trainable
because obviously when you train an individual, the same genes, you know, the person's genes
and the DNA doesn't change just because you give them training.
I mean, it's obviously the same in the beginning of training as in the end of training.
And the key question there was, and the way I started to think now were focused on if you
can train that particular performance and that particular task, can you actually use training
to improve performance, not generally, but basically improve it on other tasks like planning
when you're making test moves or when you're making medical diagnoses.
And I think that was kind of the key insight that if you could train one specific task,
and that was consistent with what we found even in the memory through digits case, because
if we tested this guy who could do eight digits, he could only do about six consonants.
So it was a very domain-specific skill, so he actually was able to improve his performance
and his memory capacity, but it was limited now to a particular type of material and a
little bit to the kind of characteristics of the task more generally.
But if your part is generally now and asked if it gives somebody else a different task,
can you actually design training such that this individual will be able to break through
sort of the performance that they, you know, currently have.
Now the practice, at least if we stay with the numbers memorization example, the practice,
this was not just, and to use some of your terminology, this was not just naive practice,
this was very purposeful practice.
You might want to take the audience down the path as we start to break this apart,
thinking of what purposeful practice is compared to what maybe many of us novices might think
of as practice.
Well, one of the keys, if you're going to practice, is that you get immediate feedback
on your performance, and I think that is one thing that when people are special in professional
context, you often have to wait to know whether you were right.
So a doctor diagnosing a patient, they obviously will try to do the best they can, but they
really don't get feedback on whether they were accurate or not until much later and
sometimes never.
In this kind of memory task, we could tell him immediately, once he tried to recall the
digits, whether he made any mistakes.
So that actually gave this feedback loop so he could actually, you know, think about what
he was generating and he kind of formed meaningful associations, primarily to running times to
group them into, you know, three digits that would be sort of a mild time, so four minutes
and 32 seconds would be, you know, a very good mild time for basically an amateur athlete.
He was then able to kind of realize when he made mistakes how he could then try to experiment
and come up with new types of ways of encoding the digits that allowed him then to progress
and be able to remember longer and longer sequences of digits.
And to jump to another example, which I just find fascinating and I'm sure the audience
will and you can take as much time as you'd like to give as much color as you like, but
and having once lived in London and witnessed and observed the streets set up in London
and how the taxis worked and I walked those streets like crazy back in the mid-1990s,
taxi drivers in London are a special breed and they have to go through intense training
and they have to learn a lot about London streets and that learning, and this is just
so this is why this book peak that you've put together with your co-authors, fantastic,
that learning, the learning of the streets by the taxi drivers in London, this changes
the brain physically, I mean, there's an altering of the brain, why don't you start
the beginning with your London taxi driver story, it's just incredibly fascinating.
I think the taxi driver story is particularly interesting because here we're talking about
people, cab drivers who are really special in any way and in fact they've tested their
cognitive abilities and found that they're pretty much normal people, but given that
they have in order to sort of pass this test that allows them to be cab drivers, they will
be tested on given arbitrary kind of starting points and end points and then they have
to from memory kind of report what would be the most efficient path to take a passenger
between those destinations and this is something that they've done well before we had
GPS and all this electronic help and it ended up taking actually many years of training
for these people to pass this qualifying test and essentially what you found was that the
end time they kind of learned some over 10,000 streets and all their kind of interconnections
and when basically McGuire in England tested, so she scanned their brains, you found that
actually these individuals who had achieved the map, actually their brains had changed.
Way of understanding here how increased memory can actually influence basically the structure
of the brain and there's now plenty of other examples but her study was so interesting because
she actually analyzed and compared now cab drivers to bus drivers who are driving just
as much and in a sense of just as much experience and found now that the bus drivers did not
exhibit these brain changes that were associated now with mastering the map of the London
streets. One of the more interesting and cool aha moments that I think any of us learned people
that want to learn about how things really work it's just one of those great moments where you're
like wow and I think it gets even more interesting is that this this comes this the learning of the
streets by these taxi drivers in London this is all about as you will describe in our conversation
today deliberate practice but and correct me if I'm wrong if one stops being a taxi driver
if one ceases to do this particular skill for let's say a decade will you see a regression
in the brain changes will the brain changes revert to the means so to speak
we will see that in a number of domains that maintaining the practice is really key
for maintaining high levels of performance and I think a lot of people will recognize that when
they stop exercising you know their performance after a couple of years reverts back to the normal
level and that seems to be a key in in all the skills that we've looked at that without practice
you basically rework back to where you started if you wait long enough there's
there's some great examples in your work beyond even the the book that we're talking about today
for many skeptics out there though I think they might they might look at some of these
quote child prodigies and they might try to draw inferences and conclusions I can think of two in
particular that you discuss in your book and I'm going to let you choose which one you might want to
exemplify in our conversation Mozart Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart fantastic example everyone
knows some general understanding of the brilliance of this very small child at a young age and also
somebody who's been on my podcast before I think she was the first female chess grandmaster
and her sister I think is the current one which we would be Susan Polgar has appeared on my podcast
I don't know if you might want to elaborate for the audience out there that wants to say
but professor Mozart he was a child prodigy was born with it you know Susan Polgar you know all
of her sisters they're all chess brilliance this what is practice have to do with this
pick pick one of those examples and run with it professor let's take Mozart because I think
he would be the one that most people be familiar with and I guess what we're saying is you need to
look at Mozart's upbringing and and one of the things that people don't recognize is that
Mozart's father was a famous musician and and and when Mozart came along I guess he had some ideas
about the possibility here of training young children so he's actually the first person to
actually write music training for basically younger children so he invested pretty much his
his life trying not to both train his older sister but primarily Mozart in terms of providing him
early with training and what we say in the book is that some of the characteristics that Mozart
exhibited like for example his really remarkable ability to listen at a tone and be able to say
which key on the piano produced that particular tone more recent research have shown that that
is an ability that virtually that any child seems to be able to attain if you give them
the training but it has to be training quite early similar to Mozart starting to play when he was
three or four years old you have to actually start the music training that early and then
the brain seems to be receptive to learning those kinds of distinctions and you can then
basically as an adult preserve those abilities but it's very difficult or almost impossible
for an adult to achieve those kinds of abilities if you start practicing at an older age you're
a data guy you're a research guy so people out there that are listening they might be thinking
well I don't want my child to have such intense deliberate practice at a young age
and you're not necessarily you're not making a value judgment here you're just saying
the data shows us that peak performers that there is something to be said for this early start in
childhood is that a fair assessment yeah and I think I would like to just clarify
I think it's very important if you want to produce a healthy happy adult that you actually
you know make sure that the training is consistent with what the child wants to do so you're
actually providing the child with opportunities for training and I think this is and I've had
some contact here with last lipo guard who is the father of the three whole guard daughters
who were so successful in chess and that's kind of a really key idea of his is that you actually
have to put the child in charge and you're actually helping the child to master whatever
the activity is that you select I guess there's all sorts of skills that if you want to become
sort of a regular professional that a parent can help the children acquire in sort of a motivating
basically very supportive environment speak to brain plasticity I think sometimes we
even though we're already in this conversation breaking open the idea that nurture can win out
and that we all have this ability as you speak to it's not necessarily what you're
particularly born with it we're born with the ability to go about and practice to get better
but why don't you speak to the plasticity notion because I think we really do get caught up in the
idea of this fixed that we're fixed but in terms of being able to change even if we go beyond
the discussion of elite performers our brain plasticity this is something where average people
that might want to start to master something later in life we're not fixed in stone we're not
etched in stone are we no and and I think one key that I found very helpful when I talk to people
adults who want to acquire skills is to realize that the younger sort of prodigies
often they might spend you know half an hour or something like that
where you're really training them with a very explicit goal so they have to be 100 percent
concentrated but basically if you push children to do a lot more than that until they're ready
to increase their time of training they're actually going to sort of feel that it's aversive
not be willing to do it and when it comes to adults you know they if you want to run a marathon
I've seen hurt people you know who go out the first time and run for maybe 45 minutes and then
they're so sore that they'd never do it again so basically that idea that if you're going to change
your body it's going to take gradual change so you need to stimulate and push for change
but you can't basically go so far that you're actually harming the body and and maybe pushing
your motivation to a point where you no longer want to pursue it and in terms of making these
achievements you know improving ourselves we are constantly up against homeostasis we are
constantly up against that we we don't really want to break through those boundaries and breaking
through the boundaries is part of deliberate practice yeah and I guess I would say that
if you're not trying to change something you're probably not doing deliberate practice
so the key idea of deliberate practice is that you're trying to do something that you can't
do well and basically by figuring out ways that you can do this better you will now
basically raise your performance to a level that you didn't have before there's some great examples
and I think chess becomes a fantastic example and one aspect of of deliberate practice so
part of the understanding is is chunking or even the phrase you know a mental representation
and I think we could we could imagine I'm gonna let you explain this but if we're
watching a chess game that the best chess players it's not about just looking at all
the individual pieces on the boards they're thinking in patterns they've developed and they've
pushed themselves over so much time that their ability as a chess grandmaster to analyze
is based on pattern recognition why don't you speak to the notion of chunking the mental
representation and using chess as an example I've often tried to basically take language so if
you're looking at basically a paragraph in English you know people will read it and
it will make sense and if it describes some physical situation or interaction people can
actually form an image a picture in their head of that interaction and I would argue that
the chess board is a little bit the same for a skilled chess player they can actually see
the structure and now see what it is that are the weak spots and and basically where you know
likely sort of attacks would be successful by having chess masters think out loud when they're
seeing a position and asked to pick the best move we can actually see what are the features
that they notice and the way that they kind of probe the position is to make a move in their mind
and then think up what the opponent's counter move would be and then keep doing that maybe
for four or five times or even more in order to kind of diagnose what would happen if they make
a particular starting move and I think understanding that that's really what's going on in the chess
players had really raises the question how did they get to be able to do this type of thinking
and I think that gets to the core of what we've been studying here you know how do you actually
build up these metal representations that allow you to think through issues in your head
and basically then be able to kind of decide on what is the best action in a given situation
is that we sometimes hear these examples of a chess player a master a grandmaster playing
against 25 people at the same time or something so maybe even blindfolded and it sounds so
impressive but what's really interesting about your work and what you've uncovered is that
the chess once you get to that level where you have put in the time to develop those mental
representations in chess that you're now let's say at grandmaster level that in some ways it's
not it's not really a I don't know if this is the right phraseology but it's not necessarily
difficult for those particular players now at that level with that amount of practice
it's not particularly difficult for them to then play 25 people at the same time blindfolded
it's not like they're going down a whole new path it's literally just kind of a a parallel skill
that comes along with having already got to grandmaster level am i am i describing that all
correctly yeah yeah and i think you know what most people find difficult to understand is how
you can play blindfolded so you know you basically have to make the the chess position in your head
and actually just think about it you can't basically look at any kind of perceptual configuration
and that seems to be a skill that people don't practice it sort of comes about from
once you plan now you can see the chess board but you actually have to make the moves in your
head and eventually as you've been training that and been planning very deeply you now have acquired
the kind of skills that allow you you know just to more or less do it without the chess board
you can do it completely mentally and when you want to play several games well then basically
you're just kind of doing that and and what i've heard your chess players do is if they try to
pick different kinds of games not to kind of confuse one chess game with the other and and
there's a lot of maybe minor skills here that people actually acquire in order to be able to
play multiple games it's essentially the the the amazing thing is this building up with that
metal representation that allows you to kind of in your own mind do things that people really need
to have to do perceptually seeing the chess pieces on the board and to build on these ideas further
i want to go back to an example that i brought up early on the the NBA basketball player Stephen
Curry and he's got in he won the MVP last year but he's better this year and there's when you
get to this level of this very high achievement it doesn't just stop some of these achievers they
just keep compounding on you know it's the it's the one level of achievement allows you to get to
the next level and you can't skip steps can you we certainly don't have have any evidence you know
that there's any sort of magical improvements but basically if you understand how what the
individual has been doing up to a given point you can actually see the improvements because
that seems to be the things that they're working on to kind of keep improving
but i think that's a hallmark of an expert being able you know to kind of monitor what they're
doing so they can identify things that they can do differently or better and once you're reached
at that very high level now you're actually able to kind of see things that other people wouldn't
even be able to kind of see that you're still working on in order to improve and then even
increase your performance beyond your already exceptional level of performance
and across your many years of studying expert performers do expert performers ever
really come out and say that their improvement was easy i have had the chance of being on a couple
of panels with olympic medal winners and musicians and chess players and i've yet to find anybody who
once i've given a talk describing who wouldn't sort of recognize this process with incremental
improvement and this kind of continuous commitment that once you practice you're going to do it with
full concentration because otherwise you're wasting your time i guess that's one of those
hard things you know in science i can tell you i've never encountered anybody but i can't
prove that somebody won't basically appear here and basically be now the counter example that
i didn't know about however i would say that i've now been researching this for 30 years
and i probably encountered some 50 cases where people initially claimed that this was an exception
but by looking more closely at the evidence i've been able to at least construct what i think is
a plausible explanation that's based more on this continuous practice even though the practice
may not have been you know observed by a lot of people who thought that it sort of occurred
spontaneously you know there's been many i think i think many is a fair word many books that have
been in popular culture that have been inspired or influenced by some of your work i think some of
those popular work would be malcolm gladwell's work and there's a couple issues in his work that
i would love for you to address i think one right off the bat is that it has become really
ingrained into society and i i'm sure i've been guilty of it too because it's so easy just to say
hey you become an expert at 10 000 hours and i would love you to address that and then maybe
even use the example of the beetles and perhaps some of the misguided uh misguided thoughts about
how the beetles actually got to be the beetles i i think when our research that we did on uh a
music academy in berlin showed that the most talented or the ones that the the music teacher
viewed had the highest probability of succeeding uh as violinists they were also the ones that
reported having spent more time basically practicing by themselves and we argue that this
is very effective when you have a teacher telling you exactly what you need to do and then you go
ahead and do it and if you do more of that it's likely that you will actually you know be able to
get better we reported that those academy students when they were 20 had on the average practice
for 10 000 hours which is a pretty amazing huge number and i guess gladwell you know was
struck by this uh so he came up with a rule that was a little oversimplified he said that
in order to achieve international level of performance uh you need to have basically spent
10 000 hours and and he pointed to the beetles as a group that played a lot of music in hamburg
germany during uh before they became famous the issue that i would have with uh his statement
is that there's really nothing that i know that makes it magical 10 000 hours the estimates that
i see for winning piano competitions would require these individuals to spend more like 25 000 hours
to win and there are other skills where it seems like you can actually be work class
in less than a thousand hours of uh basically deliberate practice so if we go back to beetles
you know they spent a lot of time playing and and we actually went to some of the biographies of
the beetles and they didn't play more than maybe around 1500 hours in hamburg although you know
they said they were playing pretty much you know 10 12 hours a day i guess what what i would argue
is a kind of even more important thing that just playing in front of an audience
the only thing that that seems to be able to improve to me would be their ability to play as a
band and the beetles were really mostly famous for their ability to compose no music and then
perform that music how to explain now how they got to be better composers would make me look now
for activities that were more directly related here to improving their composing ability
again here you need a lot of practice and we basically totally agree with gladwell about that
but there's no magical boundaries and maybe as you're pointing out some people who just count
the number of hours they've been doing things you know like driving doesn't make them an expert
just because they've done 10 000 hours of that activity the key thing is to spend a lot of time
where you're really trying to improve specific aspects and if you can actually sustain that
amount of training for thousands of hours evidence shows that you're going to be
likely to be exceptional and if you can keep pushing that you may end up you know being world
class you know malcolm gladwell brought up another issue that i i thought was perfectly
reasonable and made sense to me as a guy who had a late birthday for sports i was a baseball
player until my first year at college but i think about his example i believe it was nhl players
professional hockey players and he talked about the birth date issue perhaps you could outline a
little bit about the the birth date issue did malcolm gladwell get it all right in the long run
when it comes to the the birthday issue i i think that and i find it very interesting
because if you are a coach and you're actually trying out to pick out the most talented kids
it would be make sense here that you're actually picking out the ones are performing a little bit
better and what people found was that if you analyzed those who were actually succeeding and
actually reaching the very highest levels that they have are much more likely to be born kind
of and be the oldest people in this age cohort that are practicing together as children and
adolescents so i think that is basically correct now what people have pointed out is that these
effects are not you know incredible except for certain types of very extreme situations
were you looking at 13 year olds who were the best in soccer in england where
essentially uh there was really nobody born in the latter half of the year so most of them
were this part of this cohort that were the oldest uh among the soccer players that had
been playing together you know i think one of the things that's really fascinating about this
work your work is the motivational aspect i mean i get very motivated reading the book because
you can't help but you just look at the you look at the research you look at the data you look at
the stories you look at the examples and you say to yourself wow i can do anything if i really
want to do something but motivation is a tricky thing and i just watched a movie the other day
i don't know if you've seen it it's called whiplash it's about a jazz drummer and a very
demanding teacher that pushes this young guy and the young guy basically cracks at several
points in time he doesn't make it but basically at the end of the movie the young guy accepts
the instruction he he has the the social motivation he has the push wherever it comes from exactly
maybe it was the teacher but he finally gets it something clicks and why don't you speak to
social motivation because i i look at myself i was very motivated by you know i didn't want
to be i didn't want to be on the script that everyone else was on i wanted to do something
different i wanted to to go down my own path and that motivated me to find success and i can think
of without trying to to bore you with all the details but i can think of innumerable dead ends
that were stopped and i'm sure a lot of people would just quit and give up and go back to the
day job at that point in time but i just always felt like don't stop don't stop no quit can't
quit and there's something and whether we're talking about uh extraordinary performers or
the corporate world because your work translates to the corporate world as well uh the i can't
attitude is is a real as you describe a real red flag isn't it yeah and i think i was struck by
how convenient this idea of basically claiming that you can't or that you lack the talent
because in some ways if you looked at learning say a foreign language i've encountered a lot of
people who say that they can't do that essentially what that means is that they're not going to put
in any energy because why would they uh if they're basically just going to waste it
but it's interesting and i actually encountered one uh colleague of mine who fell in love with
basically a woman who only spoke spanish he was part of this group who had real difficulties
learning languages he was sufficiently motivated so he was quite successful here in mastering spanish
because he had a concrete sort of reason and also i think in some ways when you're
basically interacting with another individual it's it's a pretty good learning environment where you
get immediate feedback about whether they understand you or not and i also think that
it's interesting when it comes to music teachers a lot of teachers basically it's convenient to
basically tell some student here that they lack talent because they're not willing and able to
make progress so it almost takes away the responsibility of the teacher to actually
help the student get the motivation that they need in order to help progress and once we look
here at motivation as something that teachers especially good teachers are able to instill
in their students then i think it changes a little bit how we look on education and
similarly if we can convince students that they actually if they are able not to find the right
kind of training that actually will help them improve that that will you know give them
motivation and confidence that they can actually succeed because it is sort of a magical paradox
that if you don't believe that basically you're going to get any better it may be very difficult
to motivate yourself to put in the practice and basically that belief that you're not going to
get better almost needs to be changed before it really makes sense for the teachers and the
students to invest in this you know gradual progress of getting better and i also think that
having good metrics so the student can really see how they're getting better is really key
because just sort of doing things and not getting that immediate feedback that we you know
see is an essential component of deliberate practice you don't really have a sense that
you're getting better and that you know may just confirm your sense here that it's a waste of time
you know as you talk about getting better i'm thinking of an example and i want to kind of
combine some things but i'm thinking about comedians i'm thinking about guys like jerry
signfeld uh jay linow gary shandling people that put immense hours on stage and small comedy
clubs in their early 20s and then 20 30 years later they they become some of the biggest
celebrities out there i think what's really interesting about comedians and you talk about
this with chess grandmasters but chess grandmasters will go about studying their predecessors they
will they will find and look at the gains of those that have come before them i think
comedians are very interesting about that where it seems like comedians are always very willing
to talk about who came before them and there seems to be a tremendous amount of studying
as well in comedy i i'm not necessarily sure it's a direct connection between the very different
domains but why don't you speak to the idea of of studying your predecessors many people like to
imagine i must invent it out of whole cloth i must come up with it on my own but you know look
there's been a lot of people before us that have done really well and you've seen in your work
that those expert performers they look at the experts before them don't they
yeah and i think that gets to you know this effective learning and we see in all sorts of
domains where you know like for example mathematics the claim was in the i guess
14th century that it would take a lifetime here to understand math and and basically this was
referring out to mathematics that you pretty much if you're an advanced student in high school
you basically have mastered this because in the 14th century they basically had to rediscover it
for themselves and now basically you can actually get that information from math teachers and basically
math curricula and the same thing in music the level that people are playing today is vastly
superior to what they were doing in the 19th century even and and these historical changes
are directly a result here of actually younger individuals finding teachers who will be able to
fast track them to learn things in the correct way such that they get closer now to the frontier
basically where they're now going beyond what any current living musicians have done
in order to create that unique contribution and and i have to say that virtually all of the major
creative individuals i mean for example Mozart his father had him copy music pieces pieces by
other composers as a way of learning the structure of making music compositions because so you know
he was excelling in the more traditional forms of you know drawing natural scenes
and it was basically acquiring the techniques that then allowed him to basically now redirect
them towards doing things that hadn't been done before but the technical background of being able
to actually make what he was seeing in his mind's eye that was techniques that he had acquired
you know as a very as an adolescent so i think people are afraid that they're somehow going to
erase their unique contribution i see more that you need the tools so you would be able to actually
be able to realize whatever contribution that you are going to be making and being afraid to hear
that you know learning these tools will somehow remove any originality i don't find very good
evidence for that i want to shift into something slightly different for a second in this whole
topic area of your work but i i love the example because as a guy that used to play baseball and
now i practice a lot of yoga but as a right-handed hitter i know that i have a big difference between
my my right and my left hip and i can imagine after doing that for 12 13 years there's just
differences you you do that much hitting and you lean all your weight on your your right leg
something changes i think one of the most fantastic examples to really give people a flavor for
deliberate practice and what can happen physically to changes is that a great tennis player like
roger federer so much practice at such a young age it's not just the muscles and the arm that
holds the racket that's changing it's the actual bones isn't it it's really far reaching the kind
of changes that you can observe and and if we're talking about bones we know that height really
can't be changed by training but the thickness of the bones actually is influenced by training and
and it's pretty clear what the mechanism is so in your arm that you're hitting the you know the
tennis ball with that creates vibrations in the bones that then actually releases chemicals that
now stimulate bone growth so if you take x-rays of tennis players the arm that they are holding
the tennis racket has much thicker bones than their left arm but if we look at other activities
i guess when it comes to muscles and and and even especially if we look at endurance athletes
the whole heart actually is restructured to maximize now the pumping capacity of the heart
so even the arteries are growing to allow for more blood with oxygen to circulate
and and we also see more capillaries surrounding those muscles that need a lot of oxygen
to be able to sustain you know running or or swimming or whatever the endurance activity is
it's just quite amazing that you know not only can deliberate practice develop a skill increase a
skill it's it's changing the structure of the mind the brain it's changing the body it's quite
amazing what we as human beings can do with practice it's just it's i sound too excited probably
but it's it's just it's really motivating when you when you've dedicated your life to studying
this and i i you know look i've not read everything that you have done in your career but if you
spend many many decades doing this it's going to be up to other people to come along and say well
anders got all this wrong that's gonna be tough challenge isn't it again here i guess i'm doing my
best to trying to keep up with developments and genetics and uh other domains here to see you know
are there any relevant evidence and what i think is quite interesting in genetics you know people
believed here that once we were able to describe the dna that we would find these differences in
genes between elite athletes and uh basically other you know people who didn't have any sort
of obvious genetic problems but that research has really kind of uh not uncovered any sort
of individual genes that somehow would explain why some individuals are basically performing
so much better than other individuals personally i think there's pretty interesting evidence here
that training history of these individuals uh provides a much better uh explanation here
for the individual differences that we see um and and even if we take something like the
outstanding performance of Kenyan runners when you basically look at the kind of training history
that they have uh and the benefits of training at a high altitude as very young children and
being forced to basically run long distances to school every day and doing so in a very hilly
countryside would seem to you know provide some interesting ideas here about uh what actually may
contribute to differences uh that we see in performance a lot of people have talked about
those particular runners with the uh the barefoot running playing a role as well
exactly and i think that's very interesting that that that basically once you start looking at
what sets apart uh the very best runners from somewhat less successful runners it is sort of
the efficiency of their running uh so basically their ability to run without basically using up
more kind of energy and oxygen so they somehow have been able to sort of come up here with
training that allows them to maximize the effectiveness of the whole bodily system
as opposed to you know some kind of specific unique thing that would be a more plausible
target here for a single gene that could create a difference i want to relay a little story and i
want to let you comment on this so years ago and i've had him on my podcast but years ago i had a
chance in person to interview vernon smith and vernon smith shared the nobel prize with daniel
conneman uh and the each were going down that behavioral work and when i went to interview
vernon smith it was at his office then he was at george mason university for those of you that
might not know vernon smith has asperger's and so a lot of people out there will say hey but
what about some of these savants you know guy like vernon smith and i thought it was really
interesting when i went to interview him it was his his college office and we were setting up
cameras lights and everything and i said well you know dr smith you know we're gonna kind of bug you
here and uh you're gonna be making a lot of noise setting setting everything up and he looked
at me and he just said i will never hear you and it was such an interesting comment you know
here's a man who's won the nobel prize he has asperger's and but an intense focus and so and i
wanted in six months after that i was at the offices of one of the the most successful hedge
fund managers in the world and we were actually chatting in the bathroom and i mentioned to him
that i had just seen vernon smith and we started talking about asperger's and he said oh yeah we've
got a ton of guys that work with us at our firm that have asperger's because these guys can focus
like no tomorrow why don't you talk about though because there's some people out there listening
they might say mike and uh you know professor vernon smith he he's got this this this unique
advantage but it still comes down to the practice he's got the ability to focus but talk about why
don't you address that issue when people have talked about savants and perhaps uh uh guys that
guys and gals that might have a perceived advantage being on the autistic scale or spectrum
now now i have to say that i have not personally done any research uh on on on the issue here of
of of uh asperger's and and uh basically these kinds of syndromes but i agree with you that
all i know and i've basically been working now with numerous expert performers that when you
put them into the lab you know one of the things that is so amazing is how they more or less
kind of start out being relaxed and then as we get closer here to the actual test phase
how they actually become completely focused and they basically are able to sustain that
and i i don't know and i think that would be interesting research whether there are individual
differences in how able people are of actually getting into that a state of full concentration
but to me that is one of the prerequisites for actually being able to stretch yourself
is that you actually put all your attention and resources on actually improving whatever
aspect that you've picked out and i would argue that basically when i talk to these individuals
they sort of tell me how important it is for them to get enough sleep so basically that
idea here is that in order to be able to exhibit full concentration for maybe three or four hours a
day you need to have a lot of time for relaxation and recuperation and that balance here about
basically and maybe there are people i've yet to find anybody who seems to be able to kind of
concentrate for you know five hours every day for years there seems to be sort of that
upper limit around four or five hours that people actually can and and the ones that
we have the best data on are authors who basically go off somewhere where they have
no other responsibilities but still they only seem to be writing for about you know four or
five hours in the morning and then use the rest of the day to sort of more or less recuperate
so they would be able to wake up refreshed and then get in another four or five hours here
of very productive writing and i've talked to surgeons and other individuals who basically
are quite aware of that issue here of balancing that level of full concentration with recuperation
and if you want to basically maximize how much you're putting in and getting out of writing
you like to kind of keep on a pretty stable daily schedule and i don't know if you have
any experience relevant to how some of these very successful individuals organize their day
to maximize their ability here to when they are concentrating you know to really maximize
the outcome well having having written five books myself i can it's really interesting we're talking
about focus is that you you're right you can only stay focused for a certain amount of time
i think the interesting thing for me for focus is when those moments happen inside intense focus
that you enter the flow state and you can talk about this some but when you enter that flow state
time can stand still time just goes away at least in my experience it just it disappears
and you could just you could just maybe you you don't achieve a huge volume of work
but the the quality and the the precision that you can sometimes find in a flow state it's it's
quite addicting to get there i i think this is very interesting and something that i i guess
i've commented on a couple of times and even had a chance to talk to six sent me high about
a lot of people refer to flow as kind of highly enjoyable but i think several people have pointed
out that if you reflect on being in a flow state you're no longer in it so it's almost like you can
only kind of know that you were in a flow state afterwards exactly 100 percent right and and and
basically i think some people have even viewed here the flow state as actually being kind of this
totally relaxed state where you're more or less just playing you know so like if you were to dance
and just do exactly what occurred to you that that's a flow state where you're not really
trying to impose some constraint on what you're doing and i would argue that the flow state that
you were referring to when you're really focused and you're actually engaged in doing something
is more like you're so focused in it that time you're not not longer aware of the time that
you're investing so it's almost once you're kind of getting out of it hopefully sometimes
because you really feel that you've reached the end state of something that you were trying to
work on that's when you get the sense of how time more or less just disappeared but that those
two different states here that kind of the playful enjoying when somebody is going down
skiing and just having the sense of whole effortlessness is a different kind of phenomenon
than the one where you have that you know sustained focus and where time just disappears
usually i know it's time to come out of those types of states either one of two things i'm
hungry or i need to use the bathroom it's it's you it's you're serious really because otherwise
when you're in that moment you don't know uh i would love to talk about uh the the notion of
solo and in group because i i wonder not even i wonder but i know there's a there's a talk about
the notion of deliberate practice from a solo perspective meaning if this is this is deliberate
practice is difficult it's hard it's going to take a lot of effort but it's not something you
really you really don't do it with a team do you i think that given that you're really trying to
improve some aspect of your own performance that basically makes it to optimize the benefits of
deliberate practice you have to be control of your own training uh and i often sort of mention
this example with playing doubles and tennis and you miss maybe a backhand volley and then the
game just kind of continues you get another opportunity maybe you know 30 minutes later
and you're not going to do that any better so if you compare that now to uh a training situation
where you have full concentration and available resources like a coach so the coach will now give
you basically backhand volley that's really easy and you're standing up by the net and then basically
as you're perfecting uh basically your control over this it becomes increasingly more difficult
because now you know he's placing the volleys in a more difficult way and eventually you have to
move away from the net and then you know the end point is that you're rallying and then he's
including sort of a backhand volley within the rally one or two hours of working with a coach
like that i believe is going to improve your backhand volley so much more than maybe a year or two
of just regular practicing with your friends basically playing games as i think about your
career so here you've spent a lifetime studying expert performers but you have had to your career
has also been about deliberate practice you have been in the deliberate practice of studying
deliberate practice why don't you talk about some of the changes and the growth that's taking
place in yourself to the extent that you can or want to i'm really curious because this is true
you have you've also i mean anyone that has a very focused direction in life there's a lot of
deliberate practice talk about some of the changes you think you've seen yourself over your career
that is uh some interesting questions and i think i would point to a couple of sort of uh important
events when i started my career you know i was like most people really consumed and and sort of
spending a lot of as much time as i could on all the various activities ranging from teaching to
doing research and doing all sorts of things then i got the opportunity to go to max plunk and this
is where we did the research on the uh violinist at the music academy uh and that position was a
little bit different i didn't have any teaching i had a lot of free time and i think that was
the first time i realized that i could put in more hours working hard than i could really
profitably uh get benefit from so this kind of that sense here that there was a maximum so
in order to really write it was better for me to kind of set aside two or four hours of writing
and then basically you know i have other activities that would be less demanding was
a much better way and made me feel much better than uh basically this idea of trying to you know
get every minute in doing various things because as when i was a regular academic professor
university of colorado you know basically i didn't have any free time so i didn't really
have control over my time and i think that kind of idea here that that you need to sort of
take control over your time and also maybe even say no to activities uh so you can basically make
sure here that it's aligned here with your priority here in terms of what you really want
to put in your best hours on and and i've talked to a lot of people since that period
and they found that to be a very very useful idea and and i think for people to set aside
maybe one or two hours for writing or for thinking about big projects or something
but basically having those hours scheduled uh i think has made a big difference to a number of
people that i've had this discussion with and i think when it comes to issues here relating to
doing science i would argue that deliver practice at least in a very generalized way
that really corresponds to seeking out uh people who disagree with you and i found that you know
some people and and and research you know don't like to be criticized and and get annoyed
i've tried you know basically to establish uh dialogues with people who you know basically
have different views and i find somewhere to deliver practice instead of doing things that
you know i've done and talking to people who agree with me trying to convince people who
don't agree with me often generates a lot of references to new stuff that i didn't know about
and by understanding maybe people who disagree with me better i can do a better job here describing
what i think is a compelling evidence so that's kind of on a very general level and
and i guess i remember one time again here that was sort of a sense of satisfaction when
because you submit manuscripts and then you get reviews uh and at one point i really felt that
now i can actually anticipate you know what the reviewers are going to say
early on i kind of got surprised by what they were thinking and what they were commenting on
i i sort of it was a sincere self-confidence when i felt like i could kind of anticipate
what they were going to be concerned about and you know and sometimes you can disagree here about
how compelling certain kinds of evidence is but at least if you understand where other people are
coming from uh you're more likely i think to be successful than if you don't understand here
you know why they're basically upset about certain things you've talked to a lot of different
athletes and probably professional organizations i i think you had some involvement with the philadelphia
eagles a couple years ago and i can think back and you mentioned this example in your book
you talk about jim marcus russell for those of the for those of you that might recall was a very
large phenomenal quarterback at louisiana state university he left college as a junior he was
the first pick in the draft and he flamed out and just didn't make it and then you look at a guy
like tom brady with the new england patriots i don't really need to say anything but i think
he was pick 199 so my question is it clearly we have not figured out a way yet and and those
people in these very uh look i mean professional sports is big business they've not yet figured
out how to project who is going to put in the deliberate practice or have some teams figure that
out yeah i think this is really interesting and and i guess i've had several chances here to
kind of describe my view here that that some of the best football players are also the ones that
have the deeper understanding of the game so i remember when i visited the eagles uh i had a
chance here to talk to several of the players and and and and coaches and they were actually
recommending some players that they felt you know were really standing out and i was kind of
compelled here by hearing their history of how they you know from early on kind of got responsible
for kind of figuring out what other people on the team were doing and and what the opposing
team so they really you know early on started out having a very refined description of what was
going on in the game and i think that then gave them that ability here to assess here what was
going on and also what it is that they needed to do to be able to you know behave in the most
effective way for some reason i think that it's so commercialized in the national football league
that it's hard to get you know help a coach doing this because they have too many things and too
many things going on but it would be wonderful you know if a coach was interested in investing
resources and i think that would involve very much kind of helping individual players you know
develop but once you have a whole team i think it's very hard to find the time and the resources
where you actually will be able to help players and some people may even say here well by the
time you get to nfl you know that's basically when you should have learned these things
already so maybe you know college or or high school might actually be sort of a better place
to to start introduce these ideas and and maybe you know you would find people who are even more
motivated here by trying to find a way here to develop more effectively well it's funny you
mentioned that because i had a conversation a text conversation with a friend of mine who played
professional baseball for a dozen years and he now coaches high school athletes in the state of
florida many of these high school athletes that he coaches goes on go on to play at places like fsu
and play professionally and i told him i said hey you've you've got to pick this book up because
your your book professor because i said it's so motivating and if you can i would have loved to
some for someone to have told me the insights in this work when i was a very serious baseball
player at the age of 15 because you you get caught up in other things and then perhaps maybe
you practice really hard and you get to a certain level but then you you you plateau and you don't
necessarily know you're plateauing but if you if you would have if you would have had the insight
of the deliberate practice you can especially if one has the motivation you can you can see that
plateau more clearly and then perhaps push through it so i think it's a fantastic way to think
for young athletes in particular yeah and the part that i really like is
that once you have a sort of a richer description of what you're doing
it now becomes much more interesting and so it's sort of like as you get better in your
understanding of yourself and basically the game environment every game becomes more interesting
because you have a more refined way of actually analyzing it and then once you have the experience
you can go back and identify things that you can improve and and actually that first fraction of
identifying things that you can improve and basically have the sense here that it's almost
like you're kind of reaching over a sort of a peak of something so you can actually see beyond
things so you didn't even weren't able able to conceive of and i think that sort of psychological
richness i think comes very closely along with this idea of representations and your ability
here now to kind of evaluate your own performance and then use that as sort of direction for your own
training and how you can then actually see how you're getting better that that rich sort of sense
when i talk to some athletes you know they are kind of just doing what they're doing
they're not able to kind of have that appreciation or what's possible and i think that getting that
appreciation might actually make it much more interesting for them and thereby you know enhancing
all sorts of things related to the activity they're involved in and clearly this i from
my perspective the the work that you've put together is not uh age dependent so i think i
could have very easily got the same maybe not exactly the same in my 40s now but i could have
i could have really benefited from this type of understanding at a younger age
let me ask one kind of little follow-up question to this though but for some of the
the child uh i don't want to say prodigy but after they've gone through deliberate practice
at a very young age perhaps we can call them prodigies some of the the youngsters that you've
studied do they start to have this when do they start to have this self-appreciation versus
you know they're involved in deliberate practice but they might not necessarily see the entire
big picture well and i think that is a finding that is sort of interesting with respect to
prodigies is that a number of music prodigies don't have successful adult careers and some
people have argued that if if the parent is really taking over all the control here of
the training you're really not training somebody who is now going to be able to have their own
representations and be able to internalize more and more of the training so that when they reach
kind of late adolescence and early adulthood that they actually can go on by themselves
and go beyond basically what the teacher was or the parent was basically helping them do
so so i think that kind of id here of of allowing the child you know to be sort of a
as as less la pogo said to be a co-author here and basically the process of developing your own
performance is really critical and and i think that the more that you can sort of listen
to the child and make sure here that you know they are understanding and in some ways building up
these representations that allow them to take over more and more and i think that generates
self-confidence but it's also critical in order to kind of go beyond so to keep moving ahead
you really need to have mastered and internalized all the things that you've acquired well you
know i can keep asking questions all day i appreciate the time today is there is there
anything that i did not bring up today that you might want to elaborate on anything that's near
and dear to you that you're thinking about right now and all the papers and books that on your desk
are focused on on something or do you feel like we've covered the covered the ground pretty good today
well i i thoroughly enjoyed talking to you and i guess what i would say is if you find that when
you're looking here at the material that there are some questions that you know you would like to
you know ask again because of the way that i kind of answer them or whatever i'm just willing to
basically help you because i find that the way the questions that you're asking they deserve
the best possible answer and sometimes when you're trying to think as you're answering questions
that those can come out as smoothly as maybe would be ideal i want you to tell the website
where people can go if we have whether it's your your fsu website or a different one but the book
is called peak secrets from the new science of expertise uh and that's written with your co-author
robert pool meantime everybody can easily find you on your florida state university website it's
been a few years since i've been in tallahassee it's actually been my gosh i think it's almost been
i want to say 20 years since i've been to tallahassee oh my gosh yeah it's even more
than 20 slides yes it's been so enjoyable here so where are you located i'm in uh i'm talking to
you from saigon today saigon vietnam wow okay so but but you're living in the states normally
well i was living in the states about three years ago and then i started this podcast in 2012 after
my fourth book then i got hired to do a speaking tour in asia and it was supposed to be a three
or four month speaking tour for banks and hedge funds at the end of that i was living in san diego
at the end of that i said well i really don't want to go back to the states right now so i stayed
i guess sounds to me that somebody should interview you
well it's uh you know it's kind of a crazy story right there's look you've talked to a
lot of people everyone's got a crazy story right there's always uh uh an interesting i think
that's one of the things people who are really successful i found consistently are the most
interesting and and sort of people that i love interacting with i view that as sort of one of
the lucky aspects of my career choice is that i've been talking to really wonderful people
yeah it's that is true and i think people will see that when they read your book is that
it's really a phenomenal intersection i think you know look people love sports in america and
you've just had a really great insight to talk to so many different people and look the great
thing about this if i can just keep beating this drum is that whether you whatever you
might want to do even if it's later in life you've pointed out that people say they might
want to run a marathon at 80 years of age you know you might not compete in the olympics
but you can drastically improve yourself at almost any stage of the game can't you and
that's that's just motivating right and i think basically you know that idea of of the journey
that that just doing it uh but once you start looking at the experience of actually making the
improvements and stuff like that it's almost you know that you get that excitement that some
people get from climbing mountains uh but here you know it's something that you can do even
if you live in the middle of the city because most of the things are really happening in your own mind
and and i think that kind of excitement uh if i could contribute to providing people
seeing that as an opportunity to you know enrich their lives i think that would be
that would make me very happy well it's it's loud and clear in this book which is
there's no excuses if you want to do it you can do it you just gotta you've got to buckle down and
and and learn learn some about deliberate practice most anything is achievable congratulations really
really people are going to know that i mean look i've done a lot of podcast episodes
with people going to know that i really enjoy this book so i appreciate your time today
professor oh it was my pleasure maybe one of these days we'll run into each other i certainly
would look forward to that well thank you very much i i will maybe have to swing through tallahassee
the next time i'm in the states well just uh let me know here and i'll make a real
effort here to make sure that i can meet you okay thank you very much sir okay thank you


# Chapter 72

Charles Faulkner has easily been my most popular guest on my trend following podcast
He was originally featured in the book the new market Wizards
And if you can't learn something from Charles Faulkner give up now
You go to a book like thinking grow rich by Napoleon Hill who claimed it's a model of
Successful people now his idea of successful people were Robin bear robber barons Robin bearers that too that too they were
They were
robber barons
so they were
Standard oil Rockefeller
they were
Carnegie or as we now say Carnegie
It was Pullman and the old Pullman trains. It was gates. No that comes later
So there were these people that he modeled
When he asked them about their goals
He said they had goals that were above and beyond their everyday concerns
Now can you hear that now the neuro linguistics of that?
And we all make goals, but if you have a goal, that's above and beyond lunch
You know that's above and beyond put the telephone bill in the mail
That's above and beyond pick up the kids from school. You still have those goals
You still do those things right just because you have big goals doesn't mean you you know, you know, you have a life, right?
Well, okay, you know some people have it like I'm too important to pick mark my kids at school
This goes to the English is there's this thing. Yes. Yes. Well, you know, I
Decided the important things in the family. I decide when we go to war
Who will be the prime minister?
My wife decides the morning of things how many children will have where we live
Yeah, it's just people get confused about this
I mean you have these everyday concerns and then what gives your life direction? Sometimes it's called purpose
That sense of above and beyond your everyday concerns
Now the other thing that we now realize is that when Napoleon Hill was writing this he said they had big goals
Now this is confusing big content with big picture
because they would like control
the oil industry
Control the finance markets of America
control the software on every desk now the thing is these are big goals and
It makes the world very interesting for people to have big goals
It's also in terms of an orienting response very possible to take a simpler goal
To take something that people don't think is just grand but could make a huge difference
about utilizing these skills and
When you greet people when you are an act with people to make it a covenant of good communication
To bring your best to that to realize that conflict is the the nature of another model of the world and an opportunity to learn
To realize that other people are not only there for fun and reproduction
they're also there to learn other patterns from and
You can make that goal, but that goal doesn't seem as grandiose as
controlling the oil industry or
geopolitics
but if you were somebody in
Gandhi was somebody who had both of those who would have
the big goal of freeing a country
But he also had a goal which was a person to a person
And in that you can make that goal big in your mind to remind you
About the importance of your children to you and how you want to interact with them especially when they turn into monsters called teenagers
because this too shall pass and they actually need a lot of help at that point and
You can hold that goal of two people
interacting and
You can hold that large in the same way that you can hold
Controlling an industry large because the brain don't know the difference
Alright, if it's above and beyond your everyday concerns, it can direct your attention
Also, you don't be careful if you make it too big. It's it's bigger than the both of us
Curious thing when you begin to do this modeling is that we found van ler for a while was doing these seminars and make your
Goal 40 feet across, you know and tetanus color and 3d and then behind you you have
400 black singers you see these ladies
They have them in Chicago the choirs you seen him channel 25 and they're going they're going you got you go
This can be very motivating it was discovered though some people do that and it's tremendously motivate other people go
It's too big and
Actually bringing it down to earth
Some people found it made that goal so much easier to do
Instead of it being something that was up there. It was like I could do that and
We hear this again in the language bringing something down to earth and yet whoever thought of
Connecting the way we talked about things with the way we represent things with the way that we can react that we can change
that we can create our lives as
Bandler said see what I mean 2,000 years of psychology. Nobody noticed that not a lot of people on the ball
What we got to realize here is that in our world
All right, I'm gonna back up here. You know about mere neurons, right? Oh
You don't
All right, there's been wondering for some time now if
Seeing stuff affects what you think about in other words does television cause violence?
Does children getting bad role models, you know, how come some kids?
And they have bad role models. They turn on great other kids, you know, turn out. What is all this?
There's been a much debate about this but the fix is in that the neurology has now been verified
There's a set of neurons back here. Not just in me what the they're called mirror like looking in a mirror
This goes very this is very bizarre because it goes directly the idea of mirroring something that we do in NLP and the mirror neurons
Are that when you see something a part of your brain if it's primate, you know, hi friendly primate. That's us
If it's another person doing it we do that on the inside
It's literally like there's a little person in there, you know that you do those behaviors
Children make an immediate translation from these neurons. It's right near the hypothalamus into the long muscle groups
So when kids see other kids doing stuff, there actually is a physical tendency to do it
It is monkey see monkey do
And so when you ask your teenager, well, if everybody drove off a clip would you they're going? Oh, maybe
Because they because it's what one of the learnings that you have through childhood is you learn to inhibit
The long muscle groups that is you see somebody else do something like jumping off a high dive or something and in your brain
You're jumping off the high dive and then you go no, but
You could and and that's why in NLP again and Erickson saw that
Long before when you see that the micro muscle movements
When people would be you know, you were doing the stuff and you relax people you told them a story
You watch people start to do the story a little bit. Yes. Well, that's because they're inside imagining as activating the muscles
Yeah, as I say the fixes in with this is we so you're watching television. Yes
You know the brain doesn't know that if you put a picture of the brain
You know, the brain doesn't know that if you put a black plastic strip around it or fake mahogany that it's not real
On the other hand, this is why couch potatoes can sit there, you know sit there with the beer and you know
See the watch the watch the Olympics, you know and watch somebody go whoa. They go I could do that
Because they did in their head they go easy
So this actually brings up a thing about mental hygiene
In a sense, what do you want to be able to draw on by the way? This is
Evidence that mental rehearsal. This is how mental rehearsal works
The idea I'm sure you're familiar with it. The basketball example is the most famous one where they they had now people don't realize they had three groups
they had one group that did free throws and did every free throw and
Then another group that sat in the bleachers and just watched and they had another group that did free throws
Until they had done one really exquisitely then they stopped
Now this makes sense you think about the mere neurons as soon as you had an event that was exquisite
Then you would stop then you'd sit down and of course when you go to rehearse, what's there? What have you got?
that last
Exquisite wonderful example and so you're rehearsing that example over and over you're replaying that example as opposed to the person who's actually out there
Continuing to shoot free throws
Is that they're then getting every one of those some are on some are off and so forth
Whereas the person when they did the really good performance stops rehearses it they're deepening the brain as a neural net
They're deepening the attractor circuit the neurons that are tied together for that particular behavior
Because that's the one they have in mind and they repeat that and repeat that
Now the interesting thing is the people in the stands
didn't
Improve the people that actually threw the free throws they improved and the people that did this kind of systematic practice improved the most
The way Charles you said that if you do it in your head, it's just like you were there and you did it ah
With this difference
That when you don't engage the connection between the mere neurons and the long muscles
Then that connection is still as rough as it ever was in other words athletes going to the idea of representational systems have more connections
To do a certain sport. So the person who actually makes the connection between the mirror neurons and the long muscles and then
rehearses that whole circuit is
Going to get more result than the person who's merely watching it and see what can I connect it here because they didn't actually do
It and by the way, it works in the other direction
If you take up a musical instrument and there has to be that physicality, you can't just listen to music
You listen to music you can develop your auditory. It'll work
If you take up a musical instrument holding violin
Steve was talking about his kids because there his kids have gone to Waldorf schools and the fixes in we now know that
Playing physically or guitar whatever it is playing a musical instrument the connection between that muscle circuit and the brain
literally builds brain cells
It goes in both directions
In other words, the imagining will influence the body in the body actually utilizing the body for certain things can build up more
capacity in the mind
This is the brain is much more plastic than they realize now we knew this in NLP, but I'm sharing this with you because
Well as I was saying to the master track is they're going can we use this stuff covertly and I'm saying look you belong
To a field now you two belong to a field where if you have the person who's feeling phobic, right?
And they're elevators, you know, and so they see the elevator they're terrified or whatever it is and you say have them step out of the movie
Watch the movie over there. So they watch themselves, right?
Okay, run it backwards
and
Step back in and what happens?
They're not phobic anymore you belong to a field that if you think you're stepping into an imaginary circle you get resourceful
Circle of excellence
If you don't tell people you're doing a technique everything you do is covert
Because it's unbelievable
But what I'm sharing with you is some of the research that showing not only is it believable. They're figuring out how it works
While that may not make it work better. It often supports you in the idea. Yes do this and
Realize the difference things make
So the first difference I want to make this morning is to give you a launching point a way of stepping from this program
To where you're to wherever the hell you're going
One of the things we find you also know about the research on
People learning in a context
Learning is context-dependent
All right
Again studies. I don't know where they get the money for these. Somebody's got to let me know I could use this money
bunch of medical students
End of term exam standard exam standard end of term came into the classroom take the exam
They had been asked because of an experiment cycle experiment to leave an extra three hours
after the exam
They said fine sure we'll do that. We're game work medical bot weren't medical. We're going to be medical doctor someday
We're going to experiment on people we understand this so they came in and took their exam in the morning
Went away had some lunch came back in the afternoon
And they were escorted over to that auditorium where the basketball experiments were going on
They sat them down in the bleachers, and they handed them the same exam
And you know what happened?
They scored between 20 and 40 percent less than they did
In the classroom where they learned the material
This is called context dependence, and it's well there's I'll give you one experiment many
It's well verified that means that this room here given that we've done so many NLP trainings is
The place to do NLP you just walk in this room
And it will happen the difficulty is that none of you are taking this room with you ah
But you could in your mind
And I do suggest that you consider that I also consider that you suggest that you
Transfer those skills from here to where it is you want them to be what we call what?
Future pacing future pacing it's like imagining yourself doing what you've done here in a context in the future
So what I want to start with this morning is
some goal setting
That is to figure out what the hell one of you wants or each of both of you whichever I
Want those skills to get where you want them to be you spend all the time and effort and money here
So the idea is what of these skills?
Do you want where in your life and to formulate that as a goal?
All right now we got some paper back there
We're going to have you do the longman study
And actually because we'll call the longman site the longman study
Often considered apocryphal actually true is where they had people from three American East Coast universities
Just after World War two they got the graduates they talked to them
They found out which graduates wrote down their goals for life and which ones had not and they checked up with them after a decade
It's longitudinal study the study included Ted Kennedy if that influences your thinking so be it
They had the people write down their goals now in this case. I'm having you one goal at a time for the purposes of the exercise
It's an interesting thing what you're doing is you're taking an internal dialogue, and you're externalizing it
How many of you if you're not sure of the spelling of a word will write it down to see it more clearly?
Yeah, but we're talking about the same thing here is the idea that you're taking something a thought and by writing it down and
Putting it on the outside. You can see it more clearly it also dissociates it from you gives you a different perceptual position and
Allows you to interact with it differently
Somewhere on that page, and I do suggest the top the side or the bottom, but not the middle if you do use the middle
You'll find out why I suggested the top the side or the bottom in a few minutes
To write down a goal that you have coming out of this training now. What do we know about goal setting?
We have the five conditions yes
Stayed in the positive that should be the easy one at this point
I want to be able to or I want to or I'm going to okay and
second condition
Now this gets trickier because people will often say something like I want to utilize all my NLP skills
And I'm going yes. Yes, it's a good idea
The thing is that if you go for all that's such a generalization your brain goes all
Make me one with everything yeah, and mayo, but
You want to specify now there's an interesting way to specify that is
Especially if you're talking about a state a practice of skill is
Where do you want it to show up first?
What part of the skill do you want to show up first remember that thing the Erickson numbers for a second third fourth?
You can make a positive use of that by suggesting to yourself, okay?
I'm thinking about going back to wherever it is
I'm going to and it might be my office and might be my home it might be my family it might be my business
It might be my church
Context right what specifically of this skill do I want to show up and here we go to?
sensory based
You know what do you want to see?
Here feel that I'll let you know that you're starting to integrate those skills into your everyday life
Now people say but I don't want to just start I'm going ah, but you do because if you're starting that
presupposes it'll keep going
That's the idea the first second third fourth
So you want to think about something could be fairly easy for you to do something you'd expect yourself to do
But you might not if you don't take this step
You'd expect that you build rapport with people when you see them
You'd expect you listen for their language try to find it so but their model of the world you might expect you
Notice they're accessing cues or their voice tone or how they mark out certain words
But then again if you don't actually do the future pace
You get back there and go got that what happened that summer
Meanwhile this room is filled with NLP resources, you know people walk in the room of their change, you know
So we want to get that to where you're going to be. So writing down now. What is one of your goals?
You probably had it since before the course. We're visiting it now because now you've got the skills in yourself
Let's take them to where you want them
So that's the idea a goal that of this course that will be evidence for you that you're beginning to integrate those skills
Into a specific context of your choosing
Which is coming up next week, maybe so
Make a note your words
All right, you got a few words there
Now if you're writing a lot and I have no objection to that
What you want to do is pick off a couple of words or a phrase or an image in that whole bit of writing
That means that to you. In other words, you want to make it easier for your mind to keep in mind
You know, it's like trying to quote some politicians these days
It's gone
We want a sound bite
In this case, but it's your sound but you pick it not somebody else picks it
All right
As you finish that up and it's just finishing up making that thought of what it is this goal
I want to remind you gentlemen that
The women are smarter than the men
in this respect is
That the language part the broker region the language
Genering part of the brain is on one side in guys and a little bit on both sides for the women
This is why they hear tonality. They hear everything
Yeah, just just so you're not too paranoid, okay
Good it's just an encouragement to develop your acuity because they have already
What I'm getting at here is that when you write down a goal you are
Externalizing an internal dialogue you're seeing it in a new way. You're interacting with it. You're reading it and
You're only using half your brain. It's a half brain goal
the other side of the brain
Which we take to be the creative part and all well really it's about color
and it's about imagery and
about shape and
So in order to get a full brain engagement
I mean why not if you're gonna have goals in your life if you're gonna want a future paste this you wanted to be there
You want to have both sides of your brain working is
For you to draw a picture that
Will in some way represent that goal for you
Now before you do let me offer you two comments first I come from Chicago
We have a museum there. They got these pictures from the impressionist and expressionist this guy Picasso
You know it's like it three eyes two noses
You know they're great pictures to get you over any kind of feeling that you can't draw
I think this is what's in one of his big points. It's like I can draw you know
So the idea here is not the accuracy of the image, but that it evokes in you with your goal
All right, so you could make it an
Actual picture in other words you could see yourself doing something for example on the other hand you could also
Do something symbolic you draw a heart you draw a Sun tree or something in other words for you?
And I'm just giving those are just I my ideas. It's your ideas
What when you read your goal what idea or image comes to mind?
That if you if you drew that which I'm going to suggest you render some kind of an image again
You externalize that internal idea to some extent and even though it won't be exactly like your internal pictures
Or maybe if you're a trained artist, and you have the eye-hand coordination it will that's possible, too
But the idea is it doesn't need to be all it needs to be is enough for you to get that feeling you go
Yeah, this represents
my desire in this case
And by means of encouragement for those of you that aren't quite with the program yet
the
Wealthiest trader in the world dollar-for-dollar
That is to say that he's made more money for people than anyone else
He couldn't draw that well so instead of drawing his goals
He would cut them out of magazines to go through magazines and cut out pictures and make collages
He's only made maybe five six thousand percent on his money, but you can live on it
And again, it's understanding this above and beyond your everyday concerns
The idea of putting stuff out there for your brain to respond to so that's what you're doing
You're creating something that you want to respond to not the media not some company not a relative
Not even an old tape loop in your head you can put all that aside and go
What would you like to be responding to more? How would you like these skills called NLP to show up in your life?
When you really return to it fully and completely
What we want to lose review the outcome well-formed in this conditions
You can really tell this field's got jargon well-formed in this conditions
This is from linguistics. It simply means like a well-formed sentence because a well-formed sentence going to make sense
So for this sentence, which is directing your attention into the future of course stated in the positive
initiated and maintained by self
Another way to put that in more ordinary language is you can do something about it
And it's not even that you can do all of it
But that you can as we would say keep the ball rolling that you in some way now
This is problematic for some people they say well, what if it's about?
Building rapport with somebody
You know a relationship very often we have goals in a relationship outcomes in a relationship and they go
What if they don't they don't want to build rapport with me?
Well, what can I do?
No
I'll tell you what what's this?
Well, I'll tell you I'll tell you a story about one of my teachers. She anthropology major University
She's assigned to work for a professor whom of course she has to take to put it in the simplest language
He hates women
Yeah, and women shouldn't be in universities. They should be back in the home back in the kitchen
Yeah, right her eyes were rolling too and but there she was young graduate student. What's she gonna do?
What she did is the following is that she was in this office with this guy and she would just breathe with the same
Breathing right he did well. She did her other work. She was secretarial and he's the important professor, you know
When he spoke to her she would speak back in the same rhythm in the same tones of voice
Not the sense of copying but if somebody speaks fast you speak faster, so he's slower you speak slower
Measured words professorial words. She would do the same
She did this in a couple of weeks past and he turned to her and said
You know, I generally don't like women in the academic professions, but I think it's good that we made an exception in your case
Yes, we are glad about that aren't we
The idea is that even if that hadn't worked for her
but I share it because that kind of persistence does pay off is that she was still learning more about building rapport and
Practicing it even though the other person wasn't responding
So in other words, her goal of creating rapport was initiated maintained by her
So she kept that for herself in that instead of going. Oh, well, what can you do, you know?
It's like Erickson is like well, what can you do? I wonder what we could do
Of course this goal then needs to be sensory based
For two reasons one as Woody Allen says you might not think a lot about the world
That's the only place you can get a good steak
Yeah, and everything else that we would want
It's also the way that you get feedback loops going
In other words, if something is sensory based you can actually notice it might getting closer or farther away
from my outcome
If you don't have ways of sensorily measuring that
You can make up anything you want
But that's not actually going to get you to real goals real differences in the world
Context specific
Goes again to the idea of where would you like this to show up first?
Where specifically in your life would you like to begin to be practicing these skills to be?
Appreciating all the time and effort you've spent and noticing the changes in yourself and the people around you
Now when I came into NLP long ago when dinosaurs roamed the earth
These were the outcome conditions
Now this was a heyday for NLP. We were flying first class, you know, we were staying in fancy hotels
we were calling our our friends and spouses back home and we were getting divorces in relation to breaking up and
It was realized in all that that something was missing
That is that we being a good Americans had focused on our outcomes
What we wanted and had neglected not all of us but enough that it was noticed the larger context
We were doing this for a relationship, but honey now, I'm knowing I'm on the road 250 days a year, but I'm doing it for you
Yeah, it's really nice here in Hawaii. Yeah
The idea of ecology came into the picture
Now to this day some people they like the word ecology or they don't like the word ecology
But they really think of ecology as some sort of constraint on your goals
I have this wonderful goal and now I have to keep other people, you know, well, I would suggest instead
that what you're doing is you're increasing the scope of
Your situation. Okay. Now if I get this happening in my life, I know the effects or I believe I know the effects
around me with me
You increase the scope that is you increase your picture and you go so how's this going to affect my friends?
my co-work my family and
If you need to you utilize that information to refine
Your outcome. This is not the case of having to put it aside because of ecology but with ecology it gets richer
I'm reminded of my colleague Gary Schmidt that what he decided is that certain times of the year
his family would travel with him and
He would go and stay longer and make it a vacation and he'd work for a few days in the city
And then his family and his teenagers they go and his wife and they go out and see the city and do things like that
Well, was this more expensive? Yes
Didn't make a better quality of life certainly because then they got a sense of what he was doing
They joined him in his life. They got to see new places
It's a very simple example, but it's the idea he discovered by that that he actually had better outcomes than he had before
And there's also the willingness not only to look at the upsides, but to look at the downsides
That is what happens when you get so busy and you're so in demand that you don't have time to eat or do your
Laundry or anything else?
People do this in life without thinking about it
This is one of these strange things about our society is that people choose careers without ever having stepped into the picture
A colleague of mine is a lawyer and she says she says, you know
I love the law, but I didn't realize that being a lawyer meant people yelling at you on the phone 70% of the time
People always climb around, you know, that's what you're supposed to do with lawyers. I guess, you know
So there's that there's about stepping into the picture
There's life before the goal and there's life when you get the goal
So one of the ways I'm suggesting here of testing for ecology is that you step into that future and
As much as possible take a moment or two or three and live it
Like the lawyer and if you don't have rich enough representations, what do you do?
No, you don't change your goals you go out and get them
In other words if you want to know about being a lawyer if you want to know about sitting a consulting business
If you want to know about what it means to be to go back to college as an adult if you want to know about married life
You know goats go buy these people a drink take them for coffee
Show get a permission to show up at their office and build a richer representation of what that will be like
Because you may find that you love the law, but you don't want to practice that kind of law
You want to do something else you may find that you really like consulting and you don't want to be the marketing person
These are good things to find out
There are many many people in the world that want to do these other jobs. Let them you go for the ones that you want to and
so in that sense the ecology both the idea of
the
Expanding the scope so there's yourself and you expand the scope in terms of the people you can also expand the scope in terms of
Time and you're looking at the positives and you also look at the negatives so that you can come back
and
Enrich that possibility
I'll give you an example from my experience because I know it better than other people's is
That at the point that I went into consulting in the trading business
Apparently it got the attention of some people because some people that previously took little ads
They took little ads after that when I showed up they were taking full-page ads. I
Realized the cost of those ads. I decided at that point that I was not going to advertise
I went a complete direction. I said it's completely word of mouth
They did conferences and I did word of mouth and my income went up
And I wasn't marketing
Now that seems contrary, you know, but I had already decided that what did I want to do?
Did I want to spend my time marketing myself?
Or did I want to spend my time doing the work?
You make your own choices
But my point in the example is that when I checked the ecology then I found out that most consultants that 75% of their time marketing
Themselves I went nuts and what I want to do if I want to be a marketing person who would go in marketing
You know, I decided I wanted to do it differently and that caused me to revise
How I went for my outcome how I went for my goal
Which turned out and I did not know this at the time
I knew my experience would be better, but it actually turned out to be more beneficial than I thought it was going to be
You know, this is that the Joseph Campbell thing about following your bliss
did you got to figure out what your bliss is and how you want it to show up and
realize that this is just one step and
When you realize that it becomes a process you can keep revising as you discover more
All right
First exercise this morning is that I want you to each of you with two others
Get together and test for this
Because you're still learning to do it
So we do this really easily in everyday life. You go to lunch. You go. Yes, I want lunch
I'm ordering lunch or I'm telling somebody what to order and the bringing it back
I will know whether it's fresh or you know what I wanted or not and I'm going to eat it in this reality
You know, there's these considerations ecology, you know, you go well if I if I have a big mass of
French fried potatoes, I might not be awake this afternoon for this really cool exercise, you know, maybe I won't do that
When it's already in experience people do this very easily do it naturally
Where it gets screwy and why we can actually get away with teaching it is because when you step off of the every day
when you start talking about things like success or career or rich fulfilling relationships those
nominalizations
Begin to float and people say well, I really want a relationship or I really want to make a difference
Well, how do you want to make a difference? I don't know
But they want to make a difference. And so the person's going around am I making a difference? I make a difference
Example
In Chicago and again example because it works
We had a study group where we got together after we finished our practitioner training every Saturday at this
Psychiatrist house didn't have to be a psychiatrist, but he was we would practice
different skills
Practitioner in the master track and one of the people there professor at a local university and she
Was feeling very very good about being a grandmother
That she this little daughter was learning Spanish granddaughters learning Spanish English and every time little granddaughter learn a new word. She was thrilled
sensory based
On the other hand, she felt badly about
How her NLP training had not turned into a book
She had this idea that she wanted to make a difference with the NLP
The way to do that and she thought was to write a book
But she was too busy with the family too busy with the class of you know anything about universities lots of meetings
You know and so she didn't feel any fulfillment there
Well, my colleague Klaus and I we look at her and we go
How's that possible?
We said how many students do you teach in a term?
Those hundreds and how many of the students do you teach NLP to was a little under a hundred so so so each
Quarter of the year you have all these people whose lives you've touched
Who are now thinking about their lives differently are setting goals differently are approaching relationships differently
How can you think you're not having an effect in the world?
well at that point she realized she did have an effect in the world and
I bring up that example because she had a goal and
She thought she was maintaining it herself, but she forgot to have it context specific and sensory based and when she saw those
Examples then she could feel and does feel now fulfilled about those very positive and very important efforts
She makes every term with those students
So that's really what we're up to here. It's not that people don't have big goals. It's how to make sure they make their way into the world
That's why that's so important and slightly ecology so important as well
Into groups of three this is going to take maybe 15 minutes not very long what you're going to do is show and tell
You're going to show the person your picture and you're going to describe your goal
What are you going to do in the group the first thing you do is appreciate?
So if we had the good picture, let me borrow a picture
We go picture and you look and you go
All right, and then the person tells you about it you go ah
Yeah
with sincerity
All right, then you're going to with rapport and we will be watching
You are going to ask the person
You're going to listen to the goal isn't as a state in the positive you might ask them
So what can you do about achieving this goal again voice tone counts? What can you do about achieving this goal? No?
What are you what are you going to be doing to achieve this goal when you're listening to they have stuff
You'll ask about is it sensory based or maybe you use real language and go so what will you see?
What will you hear what you feel?
When you achieve this goal, we achieve this first step
And ask about and where will you be and who will be there and help enrich their images right because that's the other thing
You're doing some modalities
You're helping them to vivify that picture because that's going to make it more
Directional for them, and then you're going to do what?
Then you say wow that sounds wonderful
Are there any downsides? No? No downside. Well wait a minute here
What will this do about your time? We have the same free time
What about your friends? What about your family? How will this change your life over the next year or so?
In other words ask about ecology, and if they begin to go
Then you can go well. How would how could you make that goal even better?
by
incorporating it
Yeah, okay
Look around find yourself a couple of partners, and let's do it I
Would suggest that the more important the goal the more important the outcome
the more you check the well-formed in its conditions and
The reasoning again is that the more important it is the more likely it is to be abstract
the more likely it is that you're going to want it to
pertain to a large amount of time and
therefore the less likely it is that you're going to be thinking about specifically where it might show up or
specifically about the consequences
You know those of you that have done that whether psychotherapy or coaching or just
Wanted to help a friend know that very often people will take whatever it is
And they'll take their negative and phrase it in the positive. They'll go well
You know I don't want to be alone anymore. You go. Okay. What do you want? Well, I want to be in a relationship
And so it's a sense of
Opposite as opposed to what it is. They would really like
You go on to master practitioner. You're going to discover something called meta programs
You're going to realize that it's deeply rehearsed in the person's experience to state what they don't want and if it is
That's what they'll do
There's a lot of fun you say well you say well
What do you well I don't want this and I don't want that and I don't want that and I don't want that
And and I don't want this and I don't want this and I don't want this
What do you want and they'll actually say well, I know I don't want
John Grinder strategy hey D do what do you want?
You know what if it came up and bit you on the ass?
You kind of do like that. You know just get him going but
An alternative to that is to pace and lead
So you don't want this you know what this and you don't want this and you don't want that and you want that
And if you didn't get all those
What would you want to be getting?
Sometimes you need to do a little of that
Again, people are going to go global
And this is where you can do that magic thing. You can say okay. Well, what would be the first step?
What would let you know you were on the path that you were on your way?
Because of course, that's a feedback loop
You can get that to be sensory based in terms of a well-formed outcome
This also can be taught to have huge life-changing society changing goals
And still what's going to show up in the world? That's going to be steps on the way to that
having done that
We have a very simple model in nlp
which
is about that gap
The gap between where we are now
And where we want to be
And of course being filled with jargon. We have to have words for it called present state desired state
It's in that gap
That we get curious
You ask the person in question
Now the way it's taught in the book is to ask
most of the books as a matter of fact
What stops you
You're at a point in your training that I want you to hear that if I ask you
What elephant?
What do you do?
Momentarily you've got to think of it if you understand it
If you don't understand it if it's from some other language
you know
Well now the thing is if you didn't understand what I said you'd grab the tonality
You know, it's probably a question
And you grab the context. In other words, we're always trying to make meaning
So if I ask you so, you know, you've got this goal you're here. You've got this goal. What stops you?
What are you going to momentarily imagine?
Yeah, even if there's nothing stopping you you can come up with something
This could be called your creating difficulties or the client you don't need to
So I have a couple other proposals here
Because we're getting to the integration
One of those proposals goes to the idea. Do you know how you got here?
The answer is yes, by the way
Yes
Do you know how you got here specifically this morning?
Do you know how you happen to be in this training this summer of your life?
And you could describe
relative to the amount of time and detail requested what that is
You'd say well, you know, I heard about this nlp stuff and you know, I read a book I saw a tape people said
This is the training to go to you. You can tell me that that path you took
right up to the present
And then it gets a little spotty for some people
And then there's going home and then there's going back to work and then there's and so forth
But if you look back it's a very complete path
so one of the ways
to
fill in
This gap
Is to go back out to that future
And instead of trying it on well, you're trying it on and you're feeling it and you get into it and go yeah
That's where i'm going to be and when you're in that state
look back
And see how you've got here
Because the brain is a tricky thing it will fill in those steps for you
Or a number of them anyway
Because we're very good at looking back on things and seeing how we got somewhere
It's that looking forward thing that throws us off from time to time
And then what you can do is step out
And you can re-walk those steps back
To where you are now
And step back in
And turn and see those steps leading to that future
And you can see what would be the first step now that would let you know you're on that path of those steps
Now for those of you interested in language patterns and so forth
There's a number of behavioral presuppositions here as well
By going out and looking back as if it's already happened
Because you do the same thing you look back on your past it's happened you're in a sense staying to your brain
It's happened, but then you come over here and go it hasn't happened
Well, it's happened, but it hasn't happened
Yeah, like a lot of experience, right?
Like a number of you're going to go to dia the airport
And you've been there before and now you're going to go back and even if last time was the first time this time
It's more familiar
So it's easier to navigate
Just like when you first were learning to drive a car at least for most of you
It was complicated and all things to do now you get in a different vehicle and you go. Oh, yeah, that's familiar
So the idea is by doing this you're making this future already familiar
Which makes it easier to do
Yeah
How about that?
so
Can you guess what the next exercise is
Now why are we chunking it this way
Because you want to make sure the outcomes well formed
Before you start laying these kind of tracks
If the person goes, you know, you know, do you want you what do you want to change? I want to change everything
Yeah, and they go out there and i've changed everything
Yeah, and they look back and they go but I didn't
You know whereas if you say well, you know
What I want to do is go in and really apply this anchoring stuff
Because that I know if I do that the other stuff will come and so i've got this place in my future and i'm utilizing the anchors
People are responding and i'm noticing the feedback, you know, and you go out and you go. Yeah, i'm doing that
You know, how did I get there? Oh, yeah, I took that course and oh, yeah
And at the airport actually I saw this but I built rapport and I matched their anchor and other things begin to fill in
Oh when I told people about it and I showed them and when I showed them things
Whatever fills in for you and there'll be some gaps, but now there's smaller gaps, right?
And you step out
You walk back
Step back in the present moment
And then see okay. What's going to let me know that i'm on the way whichever foot you like to go. Okay
Getting off on the right foot. Yeah, okay
So
you
Set this up with your partner. You got the present state have them look to where the goal is
All right. So now I have to tell the nasa story going to the moon
Oh, i'm so long ago
Yeah, just after dinosaurs roamed the earth we went to the moon
Yeah
Well the deal about going to the moon that we want to focus on is this
Is they were where they were supposed to be we're talking about they're leaving the earth
And they're going to this object going at high speed
called the moon
They you want to get there right and they are where they're supposed to be how much of the time
They are where they are supposed to be
They are where they're supposed to be three percent of the time
97 percent of the time they're a little off or a lot off from where they're supposed to be
There's a lesson in this
The idea of going for a goal is the idea that you've got a direction
Not that you're exactly where you're supposed to be
The idea is do you have direction?
Do you have trajectory?
In other words, you're on the way to the goal and you're and you get a little off track or you get a little
And the point is is that you bring yourself back on track?
At least that's the point i'm taking from that story at this point
Is that we humans do this funny thing where we think if we're not right where we're supposed to be
You know, then we're in the wrong place now pulling a souffle out of the oven. Yes, you better be there on the moment
But there's a whole lot of other things in life where there's a lot more play
And in fact being off course can let you know to be on course
You ever been driving down a road and you just kind of get tired and you daydream and then you hit a speed bump
Wakes you right up
In a sense when we get off course when the world catches it in some sense for a few of us it reminds us
To pay attention
So you want to be careful about how you're evaluating
Your journey on the way
Remember you can get to the moon and back
And not be in the right place at the right time as long as you're going in the right direction
And you're making course corrections
It's a pretty significant learning and I don't know that the metaphor does it but it's a beginning
I'll also tell you this
That most of you
Will not get the goal that you made the picture of i'm probably shouldn't have told you that
No
Not about that amal what i'm talking about is that what happens is is on the way to the goal
You have additional learnings
You have additional experiences. You don't think about it, but you start to revise that goal. Maybe it gets better
You know, it's the idea that the goals are a way of directing your attention
Keep in mind that if some of these people in silicon valley had gotten exactly what they wanted
They'd be running a
100 million dollar company
If you know what the public offering for google is then you get the idea how much bigger it can be
That's only a monetary example
It's the same kind of thing
It's like you're going along in life and you think you're developing this skill and then you realize my oh this applies
To interact you and my family or wow i'm thinking in a new way
That I didn't even know to anticipate
And so your goals revise and they get richer and that's the way it ought to be because it's dynamic
The other thing I want to point out about these steps along the way comes again from my experience in the finance area
Is that I worked with guys and gal?
So we say ladies we'd say gentlemen and lady
typical finance seminar
And the colleague and I had a plan what we were going to do is do a seminar on how to make lots of money
Only then we're going to covertly teach relationship strategies
And then we were going to do a relationship seminar
And then covertly teach finance strategies. We thought this is
Because people tend to want to go for what they know to develop
Rather than developing something completely different. We'll be getting to that
The thing about that I noticed about the people who were in the finance who were young traders
Going for the gold going for the million bucks is they would make that the measure
By that they would end up whipping themselves and forcing themselves and very often burning themselves out
Because they didn't see that some of those places along the path could be rewards those could be milestones if you will
Markers we have it for those not from this country. We have marketers that let you know the mile you pass a kilometer
Perhaps in your country. There's things along the way
So in the trading business learning to run the computer
Learning the process of placing orders mastering your technique. I mean there's ways you can go
Yeah, I did that and in the same way on the way to your goal that first thing you're doing today
Yeah, you're doing something feel good about that and there are other places where you can go
Yeah, i've got this piece of it or i've I really i've got a handle on this
And so you reward yourself and it becomes easier
The idea when we set goals is not to set one big goal
You want to set near-term goals because this encourages a person to continue to set goals
You want to set some medium term goals?
Because then there's different levels of reward
It keeps you going
Like you have a long-term goal very big
A chunk of smaller
Find some natural milestones or some natural. Yeah, I think the word mini goal
It's not a word
But it finds some some some places along the way where you've actually got a bit of it
You're like I got that part
So what we've done here
Is we've set up a present state desired state space
The explorer went into the desired state
Experience it fully looked back either in the mind's eye or physically in the mind's eye because of course there's nothing there
It's all in the mind's eye
Found how they'd gotten from the desired state to the present state
They've explored then dissociated that has became an observer on the experience and viewed that path saw those steps
Explore steps into the first step
What's going to make a difference get them on the path determines that first step to be completed today
You could also see this as an elaborate form of future pacing
Future pacing as you see yourself doing something
You see yourself doing a lot of some things here. So the next thing
In terms of delts's idea that we have a present state
We have a desired state and to get from one to the other you want resources
Now I haven't written the word in there till now because most people think of resources as states
That you want a state of go for a state of curiosity a state of confidence
Uh a state of excitement
You want to be in a state of competence in your skill and bring all that skill to it
That is correct
And I would suggest that the ability to look back and have those steps appear is also a resource
It just doesn't have the flair of the resource state
But it is part of programming your brain organizing yourself to get where you want to go in life
So now we do want to go to that more traditional meaning of resources
That is and here's the question. I would suggest you ask
What's between your present state and your desired state?
As in, you know, not what stops you
What's between now right now, you know, what's between is all these steps, you know
Now some of those steps
You might not know something about you might want more resources in those steps and some of those steps might actually be something that stops you
Yeah
We're not going to that yet
Is this another easy thing to do
What are we doing?
Doing a variation on a circle of excellence on placing an anchor
Bless you and you too
Because we are people creatures with all the resources
We need but i'm unhappy with the word need we're with all the resources we could need or want
And very often more than we can imagine
Because you think back on certain moments when something incredible happened and you had some feeling or some insight or ability
And it's still there
And we know from the mere neuron ideas now
We know from our experience in lp if you go back to that moment and vivify it
Then your neurology
Has it and then you can take that around
And bring that into the moment or moments
Where you want it to be there now, what are you doing?
You're taking the v and the a the visual and auditory of this
Steps and you're bringing this new k in and you're making new experiences that you're going to be having
But you already had them so it's going to be easier to have them
Aren't we clever creatures?
All right
So this exercise you've just seen it is with your partners again is that you set it up now
They've got steps from here to there
And then you can say well, what's between here and there?
And they might say a lot of steps
You know, they're gonna in other words gonna have some reaction
And then you're going to say so what resource what emotional state what what idea what kind of skills if you had them present here
Would make this so much easier so much more enjoyable
And if they pick something like discipline
Then
You want to go okay discipline
Well, let me ask you
You know is is what will is you know the discipline being able what will that do for you?
All right
Do you want to get to remember the idea of chunking up?
You know what's important about discipline what will discipline do for you? You were looking for something bigger
Because they're going to want to do it the way they've done it
And you're there to offer something new and different. That's the whole idea of this interaction the explorer and the guide
So if they if they if they want I want confidence
You know, and well, what does what's confidence going to do? You know, it's going to make me feel it's possible
He says what what was a time in your life because if you've got yourself here you've had experiences in your life where
Nothing could stop you. It's like you saw something and you just went for it
What if that experience were present here?
Or what if it were as you were saying humor?
Pixiness playfulness
It's a different way of understanding a resource instead of like well, I need more discipline and i'm thinking
Yeah, that would probably work and what's going to make it easier. What's going to make it more enjoyable
What's going to make it a delight to interact with this?
And you talk and you have the voice tone right because the voice tone carries
So you're talking to the person too and you look at them and you go. Oh, I bet you know how to make good trouble
Yeah
Then he goes yeah, I do I had a few of those experiences
Okay, be a little ecological, you know, what would be appropriate that that playfulness because you can always take the state, you know
the curiosity
What's around the next corner
When you've got that the person go back
Get the state, of course, you're calibrating two in your group. They glow a little bit you go
Good, you know now take that with you step off come around and put that right into the moment
On that path on those steps where you want it
And if they look at you like people in a number of steps then you say, okay now that it's there fully and completely
Go ahead and carry it forward
Noticing how it makes your journey so much easier more delightful and worthwhile
Or words to that effect
The question there is
about how a specific kind of goal
Can actually get you in trouble?
And and this is where you know, what is the purpose of that goal?
This goes to the other dimension
If you will the idea that we've been talking about the the future out here. We indicate in the past
We've had people step out into an observer position
The thing is that people do this kind of thing all the time anyway
right
Well, think about it. I mean people they'll they'll project. Oh, I wonder what I have for lunch going in the future
People will go. Oh, yeah that restaurant like that was really good. You know even for lunch, you know, they're flipping around in time
They're in the experience or they're watching the experience in the outside going. Oh
And stepping back in or somebody tripped. Oh and they get that person's feelings
And people don't realize they're doing all these
Changes so quickly and that they add up to what we call strategies
One of the ways I see, you know by physicalizing it getting a person to experience those differences
The mat we have the trimmerty mat here
is another effort
At creating a physicalization the idea that
When you've done this the person goes, okay
Well, here's where you're in your bone body and here's where you go back to the past
And here's where you're planning for that future and you go into that future
For many people it's very useful to sort that out if the person has a kinesthetic leaning
Then doing the timeline work doing the walking we were doing this morning
Is very useful and i'm sure a number of you noted that judy did less walking
Although she certainly looks capable
She did it in
Her mind's eye her mind's ear her mind's body you can do that as well
In fact, it used to be with nlp that we taught it all the sitting down
That people would do these things. It's just when we physicalize them and brought them out like this
It became easier for people to understand and appreciate
You've got the dimension of time. We got the dimension of other people and observer
You're talking about the next dimension here and the next dimension up
Is about importance. What's important about making a million dollars?
The idea that people can become too attached to a particular outcome
And forget that those outcomes are only there because they represent the fulfillment of certain criteria
You know, what's important about a million dollars? I'll have you be him for a moment. We'll just play
Well, from what level of him I think it's just something
What's his name?
Give me a doesn't matter
All right, carol. His name is carol. carol. What's important about the millionaire? I think for him. It was just
Having he just made the thing in his mind of having a million dollars period. I mean that was
Success to him, I think. All right. All right. And what is it that makes a million dollar success?
From what I know of this guy. Sure
I think he can retire or something
Okay, and what's important about retiring being able to retire when you want
Maybe doing what you want
Ah
So what's important is being able to do what you want
Is this familiar? Yeah, is the virginia satyr example
You know that one where the young daughter is being brought in
to
Virginia
The father is dragging her in the daughter is is you've got the earrings and the clothes and you kind of wonder if there's a tattoo
Under the shirt kind of thing and
That's you know, it says well, what's what's going on here?
You know and it says I want her to mind and of course, you can see this dog. You're not going to mind
You know and so satyr building rapport goes well, what's important about her minding?
Well, you know, she'll she'll know the right thing to do the daughter's
Satyr is what's important about knowing the right things to do. Well, you'll you'll get on in the world better
Oh, so you want her to get on in the world better?
Well, yeah, I'm her dad and what's important about her getting on in the world better
Well, I want her to have a good life daughter starting to look now, huh?
You know goes the next one and why would you care if she has a good life or not?
dad tears up
Because I love her
This is about detached very important skill set here
That's the other side of the goal setting is goal setting is being very specific and getting sensory based and getting into behavior
You also want the flexibility to go. Well, why bother to go for that desired state?
Because it has attached to it stated or not
Certain values that this person you're talking about holds dear that other people hold dear
It's the fulfillment of those criteria those values we use those words interchangeably
That the person experiences when they get the goal
and also
they don't experience
If they don't get the goal, yeah, I mean because I
I mean he seems always disappointed that he never
You know got he didn't take in all the other things in a consideration when he was 16
But he still has that and every time he thinks about it he gets disappointed
And yeah, I understand and and I this is a rumor this is second hand information i'm getting so it would be
You know, it's certainly, you know, long distance, you know
Coaching here if I were to suggest anything
I would say though that it's about what I said earlier about goals help us set directions
They get us moving in life in a certain direction and with that direction we encounter experience
And then if we're awake and alive we can revise our goals based on new information
Or as i've often noted that what were your goals when you were five years old?
And did they change by the time you were 15?
We'd imagine a few of them changed and even more of them changed by the time you were 25
those changes are
Personal or social at 15. It was like
The opposite sex which was either you or huh?
At 25 a different relationship at 35
You might be concerned about raising your own children and how they're going to deal with that transition
And so we are presented with all these opportunities to apply ourselves
And make a difference and experience incredible things
And that to me is what goals help us to do
Closer to our heart's desire for some people it's a fast boat for some people
It's a ticker tape and having a lot of other people asking their opinions for other people
It's being able to go for a walk in the woods when they want
Having said that kind of thing the next step
Is to get the person to appreciate that all these efforts that you just made that you set up the spaces again
You ask what's between you and your desired state and that answer utilized a select a resource state
Had the person go back and get that resource state bring it around to that future and put it where they want it
And then spread it to other future moments as desired
That all of that effort is actually in service of
These criteria
I need to keep finding these excerpts from charles
Absolutely great stuff
applicable to anyone and everyone
That was not just for trading that is for everyone investing entrepreneurism
Venture capital. I don't care. That's relevant to all of us
And one quick reminder
Go ahead and take the time
Write that review
Covell.com forward slash itunes. That's covell.com forward slash itunes
Give me a review of this podcast say something positive
Send me an email michael at covell.com after you write the review. I will send you a trend following
cd of extras
And please check out charles faulkner online easily found at charles faulkner.com


# Chapter 73

Please note, there is an addendum, an extra PDF document that you will need for this book.
You can find that for free at trendfollowing.com slash trendfollowing, again, trendfollowing.com
forward slash trendfollowing.


# End Credits

This has been trend following how to make a fortune in bull bear and black swan markets fifth edition by Michael Covell
narrated by Joel Richards and Michael Covell copyright 2017 by trend following and Michael Covell
production copyright
2017 by trend following and Michael Covell audible hopes you have enjoyed this program


